22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 2




               The 22
           Immutable Laws
            of Marketing
             Violate Them at Your Own Risk




                       Al Ries and Jack Trout
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 3




                       Dedicated to the elimination of
                         myths and misconceptions
                        from the marketing process
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 4




                              Contents
              Introduction ix
          1. The Law of Leadership
          2. The Law of the Category
          3. The Law of the Mind
          4. The Law of Perception
          5. The Law of Focus
          6. The Law of Exclusivity
          7. The Law of the Ladder
          8. The Law of Duality
          9. The Law of the Opposite
          10. The Law of Division
          11. The Law of Perspective
          12. The Law of Line Extension
          13. The Law of Sacrifice
          14. The Law of Attributes
          15. The Law of Candor
          16. The Law of Singularity
          17. The Law of Unpredictability
          18. The Law of Success
          19. The Law of Failure
          20.The Law of Hype
          21. The Law of Acceleration
          22. The Law of Resources
             Warning

          About the Author
          Credits
          Copyright
          About the Publisher
          Cover
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 5




                       Introduction

            Billions of dollars have been wasted on marketing
         programs that couldn’t possibly work, no matter how
         clever or brilliant. Or how big the budgets.
            Many managers assume that a well-designed, well-exe-
         cuted, well-financed marketing program will work. It’s not
         necessarily so. And you don’t have to look further than IBM,
         General Motors, and Sears, Roebuck to find examples.
            The tools and techniques used at Sears, Roebuck might
         have been right, sometimes even spectacular. And the man-
         agers who ran the GM programs might have been the best
         and the brightest. Certainly the best and the brightest peo-
         ple traditionally have been attracted to the biggest and the
         best companies, like GM and IBM. But the programs
         themselves were based on assumptions that were flawed.
            John Kenneth Galbraith, when asked what he
         believed was America’s perception of the country’s
         giant corporations, said that we feared corporate
         power. Today, we fear corporate incompetence!
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 6




                                  INTRODUCTION



            All companies are in trouble. Especially big compa-
         nies. General Motors is a good example. Over the past
         decade the company paid a terrible price for destroy-
         ing the identity of its brands. (It priced them alike as
         well as made them look alike.) Ten share points evap-
         orated, which translates into about $10 billion a year in
         sales.
            GM’S problem wasn’t a competitive problem,
         although competition did increase. It wasn’t a quality
         problem either, although GM obviously wasn’t deliv-
         ering top-notch quality. It was very definitely a mar-
         keting problem.
            When a company makes a mistake today, foot-
         prints quickly show up on its back as competition
         runs off with its business. To get the business back,
         the company has to wait for others to make mistakes
         and then figure out how to exploit the situation.
            So how do you avoid making mistakes in the
         first place? The easy answer is to make sure your
         programs are in tune with the laws of marketing.
         (Although we have defined our ideas and con-
         cepts under the “marketing” banner, they are use-
         ful no matter where you are in a company, and no
         matter what product or service your company is
         selling.)
            What are these marketing laws? And who brought
         them down from Mount Sinai on a set of stone tablets?
            The fundamental laws of marketing are those
         described in this book.
            But who says so? How come two guys from Connecticut
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 7




                                  INTRODUCTION



         have discovered what thousands of others have over-
         looked? There are, after all, many sophisticated market-
         ing practitioners and academics. Why have they missed
         what we think is so obvious?
            The answer is simple. As far as we can tell, almost
         no one is willing to admit that there are any laws of
         marketing—certainly none that are immutable.
            There are laws of nature, so why shouldn’t there be
         laws of marketing? You can build a great-looking air-
         plane, but it’s not going to get off the ground unless it
         adheres to the laws of physics, especially the law of
         gravity. You can build an architectural masterpiece on
         a sand dune, but the first hurricane will undermine
         your creation. So it follows that you can build a bril-
         liant marketing program only to have one of the
         immutable laws knock you flat if you don’t know what
         they are.
            Perhaps it’s human nature not to admit there are
         things you can’t do. Certainly most marketers believe
         that anything is achievable if you are energetic enough,
         or creative enough, or determined enough. Especially
         if you are willing to spend enough money.
            Once you open your mind to the possibility that
         there are laws of marketing, it’s easy to see what they
         are. In truth, they are obvious.
            We have been studying what works in marketing
         and what doesn’t for more than 25 years. What we
         have found is that programs that work are almost
         always in tune with some fundamental force in the
         marketplace.
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 8




                                  INTRODUCTION



            In our books, articles, speeches, and videos we have
         analyzed marketing principles in some detail. We have
         developed strategic models of the marketing process,
         including a physical model of the human mind, which
         we helped popularize under the concept of “position-
         ing.” We also developed a military model of the mar-
         ketplace, which assigns companies and brands to
         either defensive, offensive, flanking, or guerrilla
         modes of marketing warfare.
            After years of working on marketing principles and
         problems, we have distilled our findings into the basic
         laws that govern success and failure in the market-
         place.
            We call these principles the Immutable Laws of
         Marketing, and there are 22 of them. Violate them at
         your own risk.
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 1
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 2




                            1
                        The Law of
                        Leadership
                           It’s better to be first
                          than it is to be better.




                                       2
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 3




            Many people believe that the basic issue in market-
         ing is convincing prospects that you have a better
         product or service.
            Not true. If you have a small market share and you
         have to do battle with larger, better-financed competi-
         tors, then your marketing strategy was probably faulty
         in the first place. You violated the first law of market-
         ing.
            The basic issue in marketing is creating a category
         you can be first in. It’s the law of leadership: It’s bet-
         ter to be first than it is to be better. It’s much easier to
         get into the mind first than to try to convince some-
         one you have a better product than the one that did get
         there first.
            You can demonstrate the law of leadership by ask-
         ing yourself two questions:

           1) What’s the name of the first person to fly the
         Atlantic Ocean solo? Charles Lindbergh, right?
           2) What’s the name of the second person to fly the
         Atlantic Ocean solo? Not so easy to answer, is it?

           The second person to fly the Atlantic Ocean solo
         was Bert Hinkler. Bert was a better pilot than
         Charlie—he flew faster, he consumed less fuel. Yet
         who has ever heard of Bert Hinkler? (He left home and
         Mrs. Hinkler hasn’t heard from him since.)
           In spite of the evident superiority of the Lindbergh
         approach, most companies go the Bert Hinkler route.
         They wait until a market develops. Then they jump in

                                       3
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 4




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         with a better product, often with their corporate name
         attached. In today’s competitive environment, a me-too
         product with a line extension name has little hope of
         becoming a big, profitable brand (chapter 12: The Law
         of Line Extension).
            The leading brand in any category is almost always
         the first brand into the prospect’s mind. Hertz in rent-
         a-cars. IBM in computers. Coca-Cola in cola.
            After World War II, Heineken was the first import-
         ed beer to make a name for itself in America. So four
         decades later, what is the No. 1 imported beer? The
         one that tastes the best? Or Heineken? There are 425
         brands of imported beer sold in America. Surely one of
         these brands must taste better than Heineken, but does
         it really matter? Today, Heineken is still the No.1
         imported beer, with 30 percent of the market.
            The first domestic light beer was Miller Lite. So
         what is the largest-selling light beer in America today?
         The one that tastes the best? Or the one that got into
         the mind first?
            Not every first is going to become successful, how-
         ever. Timing is an issue—your first could be too late.
         For example, USA Today is the first national newspa-
         per, but it is unlikely to succeed. It has already lost
         $800 million and has never had a profitable year. In a
         television era, it may be too late for a national newspa-
         per.
            Some firsts are just bad ideas that will never go any-
         where. Frosty Paws, the first ice cream for dogs, is
         unlikely to make it. The dogs love it, but the owners

                                       4
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 5




                           THE LAW OF LEADERSHIP



         are the ones who buy the groceries, and they think that
         dogs don’t need an ice cream of their own. They
         should be happy just to lick the plates.
             The law of leadership applies to any product, any
         brand, any category. Let’s say you didn’t know the
         name of the first college founded in America. You can
         always make a good guess by substituting leading for
         first. So what’s the name of the leading college in
         America? Most people would probably say Harvard,
         which is also the name of the first college founded in
         America. (What’s the name of the second college
         founded in America? The College of William and
         Mary, which is only slightly more famous than Bert
         Hinkler.)
             No two products are any similar than twins are. Yet
         twins often complain that the first of the two whom a
         person meets always remains their favorite, even
         though the person also gets to know the other one.
             People tend to stick with what they’ve got. If you
         meet someone a little better than your wife or husband,
         it’s really not worth making the switch, what with
         attorneys’ fees and dividing up the house and kids.
             The law of leadership also applies to magazines.
         Which is why Time leads Newsweek, People leads Us,
         and Playboy leads Penthouse. Take TV Guide, for
         example. Back in the early fifties the then-powerful
         Curtis Publishing Company tried to field a television-
         listings magazine to compete with the fledgling TV
         Guide. Even though TV Guide had only a minuscule
         head start, and despite the awesome strength of Curtis,

                                       5
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 6




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         the Curtis publication never really got off the ground.
         TV Guide had preempted the field.
            The law of leadership applies equally as well to
         hard categories like automobiles and computers as it
         does to soft categories like colleges and beer. Jeep was
         first in four-wheel-drive off-the-road vehicles. Acura
         was first in luxury Japanese cars. IBM was first in
         mainframe computers. Sun Microsystems was first in
         workstations. Jeep, Acura, IBM, and Sun are all lead-
         ing brands.
            The first minivan was introduced by Chrysler. Today
         Chrysler has 10 percent of the car market and 50 per-
         cent of the minivan market. Is the essence of car market-
         ing making better cars or getting into the market first?
            The first desktop laser printer was introduced by a
         computer company, Hewlett-Packard. Today the com-
         pany has 5 percent of the personal computer market
         and 45 percent of the laser printer market.
            Gillette was the first safety razor. Tide was the first
         laundry detergent. Hayes was the first computer
         modem. Leaders all.
            One reason the first brand tends to maintain its
         leadership is that the name often becomes generic.
         Xerox, the first plain-paper copier, became the name
         for all plain-paper copiers. People will stand in front of
         a Ricoh or a Sharp or a Kodak machine and say, “How
         do I make a Xerox copy?” They will ask for the
         Kleenex when the box clearly says Scott. They will
         offer you a Coke when all they have is Pepsi-Cola.
            How many people ask for cellophane tape instead

                                       6
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 7




                           THE LAW OF LEADERSHIP



         of Scotch tape? Not many. Most people use brand
         names when they become generic: Band-Aid,
         Fiberglas, Formica, Gore-Tex, Jello, Krazy Glue, Q-
         tips, Saran Wrap, Velcro—to name a few. Some people
         will go to great lengths to turn a brand name into a
         generic. “FedEx this package to the Coast.” If you’re
         introducing the first brand in a new category, you
         should always try to select a name that can work gener-
         ically. (Lawyers advise the opposite, but what do they
         know about the laws of marketing?)
            Not only does the first brand usually become the
         leader, but also the sales order of follow-up brands
         often matches the order of their introductions. The best
         example is ibuprofen. Advil was first, Nuprin was sec-
         ond, Medipren was third. That’s exactly the sales order
         they now enjoy: Advil has 51 percent of the ibuprofen
         market, Nuprin has 10 percent, and Medipren has 1
         percent.
            The fourth brand that entered the market was
         Motrin IB. Even though it has the powerful prescrip-
         tion name for ibuprofen, Motrin’s market share is only
         15 percent. (Keep in mind that Advil was introduced
         with a “Same as the prescription drug Motrin” theme.)
         And note the generic substitution. Consumers use
         Advil as a generic term. Rarely do they use the word
         ibuprofen. Even an M.D. will tell a patient, “Take two
         Advil and call me in the morning.”
            Also consider Tylenol, the first brand of acetamino-
         phen. Tylenol is so far ahead of the No. 2 brand that it’s
         hard to determine who is No. 2.

                                       7
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 8




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            If the secret of success is getting into the prospect’s
         mind first, what strategy are most companies commit-
         ted to? The better-product strategy. The latest and
         hottest subject in the business management field is
         benchmarking. Touted as the “ultimate competitive
         strategy,” benchmarking is the process of comparing
         and evaluating your company’s products against the
         best in the industry. It’s an essential element in a
         process often called “total quality management.”
            Unfortunately, benchmarking doesn’t work.
         Regardless of reality, people perceive the first product
         into the mind as superior. Marketing is a battle of per-
         ceptions, not products.
            So what’s the name of the first brand of aspirin? The
         first brand of acetaminophen? The first brand of
         ibuprofen? (Hint: Substitute leading for first and
         you’ll have the answers to these three questions.)
            Charles Schwab bills itself as “America’s largest dis-
         count broker.” Are you surprised that the Charles Lindbergh
         of the discount brokerage business is Charles Schwab?
            Neil Armstrong was the first person to walk on the
         moon. Who was second?
            Roger Bannister was the first person to run a four-
         minute mile. Who was second?
            George Washington was the first president of the
         United States. Who was second?
            Thomas’ was the first brand of English muffin.
         What was second?
            Gatorade was the first sports drink. What was sec-
         ond?

                                       8
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 9




                           THE LAW OF LEADERSHIP



           If you’re second into the prospect’s mind, are you
         doomed to languish forever with Buzz Aldrin, John
         Landy, John Adams, some unknown English muffin,
         and some unknown sports drink? Not necessarily.
         Fortunately, there are other laws.




                                       9
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 10




                            2
                        The Law of
                       the Category
                 If you can’t be first in a category,
             set up a new category you can be first in.




                                       10
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 11




             What’s the name of the third person to fly the
         Atlantic Ocean solo?
             If you didn’t know that Bert Hinkler was the second
         person to fly the Atlantic, you might figure you had no
         chance at all to know the name of the third person. But
         you do. It’s Amelia Earhart.
             Now, is Amelia known as the third person to fly the
         Atlantic Ocean solo, or as the first woman to do so?
             After Heineken became a big success, the people
         at Anheuser-Busch could have said, “We should bring
         in an imported beer, too.” But they didn’t. Instead
         they said, “If there’s a market for a high-priced
         imported beer, maybe there’s a market for a high-
         priced domestic beer.” And so they started to promote
         Michelob, the first high-priced domestic beer, which
         today out-sells Heineken two to one. (Actually,
         Anheuser-Busch also brought in an imported beer,
         Carlsberg, which has a very good reputation in
         Europe. In the United States, however, the me-too
         Carlsberg never went anywhere.)
             Miller Lite was the first domestic light. It took an
         importer five years to say, “If there’s a market for a
         domestic light beer, maybe there’s a market for an
         imported light beer.” The result was Amstel Light,
         which became the largest-selling imported light beer.
             If you didn’t get into the prospect’s mind first, don’t
         give up hope. Find a new category you can be first in.
         It’s not as difficult as you might think.
             After IBM became a big success in computers,
         everybody and his brother jumped into the field.

                                      11
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 12




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         Burroughs, Control Data, General Electric,
         Honeywell, NCR, RCA, Sperry. Snow White and the
         seven dwarfs, they were called.
            Which dwarf grew up to become a worldwide power-
         house, with 126,000 employees and sales of $14 billion,
         a company often dubbed “the second largest computer
         company in the world”? None of them. The most success-
         ful computer company of the seventies and eighties, next
         to IBM, was Digital Equipment Corporation. IBM was
         first in computers. DEC was first in minicomputers.
            Many other computer companies (and their entre-
         preneurial owners) became rich and famous by follow-
         ing a simple principle: If you can’t be first in a catego-
         ry, set up a new category you can be first in.
            Tandem was first in fault-tolerant computers and
         built a $1.9 billion business. So Stratus stepped down
         with the first fault-tolerant minicomputer. Today
         Stratus is a $500 million company.
            Are the laws of marketing difficult? No, they are
         quite simple. Working things out in practice is another
         matter, however.
            Cray Research went over the top with the first
         supercomputer. Today, Cray is an $800 million compa-
         ny. So Convex put two and two together and launched
         the first minisupercomputer. Today, Convex is a $200
         million company.
            Sometimes you can turn an also-ran into a winner
         by inventing a new category. Commodore was just
         another manufacturer of home personal computers
         that wasn’t going anywhere until it positioned the

                                       12
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 13




                          THE LAW OF THE CATEGORY



         Amiga as the first multimedia computer. Today the
         Commodore Amiga is a big success, with more than
         $500 million worth sold annually.
            There are many different ways to be first. Dell got into the
         crowded personal computer field by being the first to sell
         computers by phone. Today Dell is a $900 million company.
            When you launch a new product, the first question
         to ask yourself is not “How is this new product better
         than the competition?” but “First what?” In other
         words, what category is this new product first in?
            Charles Schwab didn’t open a better brokerage
         firm. He opened the first discount broker.
            Lear’s was not the first woman’s magazine. It was
         the first magazine for the mature woman. (The maga-
         zine for the woman who wasn’t born yesterday.)
            This is counter to classic marketing thinking, which
         is brand oriented: How do I get people to prefer my
         brand? Forget the brand. Think categories. Prospects
         are on the defensive when it comes to brands.
         Everyone talks about why their brand is better. But
         prospects have an open mind when it comes to cate-
         gories. Everyone is interested in what’s new. Few peo-
         ple are interested in what’s better.
            When you’re the first in a new category, promote
         the category. In essence, you have no competition.
         DEC told its prospects why they ought to buy a mini-
         computer, not a DEC minicomputer.
            In the early days, Hertz sold rent-a-car service.
         Coca-Cola sold refreshment. Marketing programs of
         both companies were more effective back then.

                                      13
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 14




                             3
                        The Law of
                         the Mind
                 It’s better to be first in the mind
                than to be first in the marketplace.




                                       14
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 15




            The world’s first personal computer was the MITS
         Altair 8800.
            The law of leadership would suggest that the MITS
         Altair 8800 (an unfortunate choice of names) ought to
         be the No. 1 personal computer brand. Unfortunately,
         the product is no longer with us.
            Du Mont invented the first commercial television
         set. Duryea introduced the first automobile. Hurley
         introduced the first washing machine. All are gone.
            Is something wrong with the law of leadership in
         chapter 1? No, but the law of the mind modifies it. It’s
         better to be first in the prospect’s mind than first in the
         marketplace. Which, if anything, understates the
         importance of being first in the mind. Being first in
         the mind is everything in marketing. Being first in the
         marketplace is important only to the extent that it
         allows you to get in the mind first.
            For example, IBM wasn’t first in the marketplace
         with the mainframe computer. Remington Rand was
         first, with UNIVAC. But thanks to a massive market-
         ing effort, IBM got into the mind first and won the
         computer battle early.
            The law of the mind follows from the law of percep-
         tion. If marketing is a battle of perception, not product,
         then the mind takes precedence over the marketplace.
            Thousands of would-be entrepreneurs are tripped
         up every year by this law. Someone has an idea or con-
         cept he or she believes will revolutionize an industry,
         as well it may. The problem is getting the idea or con-
         cept into the prospect’s mind.

                                      15
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 16




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



             The conventional solution to the problem is money.
         That is, the resources to design and build product or
         service organizations plus the resources to hold press
         conferences, attend trade shows, run advertisements,
         and conduct direct mail programs (chapter 22: The
         Law of Resources).
             Unfortunately, this gives rise to the perception that
         the answer to all marketing questions is the same:
         money. Not true. More money is wasted in marketing
         than in any other human activity (outside of govern-
         ment activities, of course).
             You can’t change a mind once a mind is made up.
         It’s like going head-to-head against an entrenched
         enemy, the charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava
         being history’s most famous example, closely followed
         by Pickett’s fiasco at Gettysburg.
             Wang was first in word processors. But the world
         passed such machines by and went on to computers.
         Wang, however, wasn’t able to make the transition. In
         spite of spending millions of dollars promoting its per-
         sonal computers and minicomputers, Wang is still per-
         ceived as a word processor company.
             Xerox was first in copiers and then tried to get into
         the computer business. Twenty-five years and $2 bil-
         lion later, Xerox is nowhere in computers.
             You want to change something in a computer? Just type
         over or delete the existing material. You want to change
         something in a mind? Forget it. Once a mind is made up,
         it rarely, if ever, changes. The single most wasteful thing
         you can do in marketing is try to change a mind.

                                       16
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 17




                             THE LAW OF THE MIND



            That accounts for the mystery of the well-formed
         opinion that can almost instantly appear in a person’s
         mind. One day you’ve never heard of a person. The
         next day that person is famous. The “overnight sensa-
         tion” is not an unusual phenomenon.
            If you want to make a big impression on another
         person, you cannot worm your way into their mind and
         then slowly build up a favorable opinion over a period
         of time. The mind doesn’t work that way. You have to
         blast your way into the mind.
            The reason you blast instead of worm is that people
         don’t like to change their minds. Once they perceive
         you one way, that’s it. They kind of file you away in
         their minds as a certain kind of person. You cannot
         become a different person in their minds.
            One of the mysteries of marketing is the role of
         money. One day a few dollars can work a major mira-
         cle. The next day millions of dollars can’t save a com-
         pany from going under. When you have an open mind
         to work with, even a small amount of money can go a
         long way. Apple got off the computer ground with
         $91,000 contributed by Mike Markkula.
            Apple’s problem in getting into its prospects’ minds
         was helped by its simple, easy-to-remember name. On
         the other hand, Apple’s competitors had complicated
         names that were difficult to remember. In the early days,
         five personal computers were in position on the launch-
         ing pad: Apple II, Commodore Pet, IMSAI 8080, MITS
         Altair 8800, and Radio Shack TRS-80. Ask yourself,
         which name is the simplest and easiest to remember?

                                      17
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 18




                            4
                        The Law of
                        Perception
               Marketing is not a battle of products,
                   it’s a battle of perceptions.




                                       18
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 19




             Many people think marketing is a battle of prod-
         ucts. In the long run, they figure, the best product will
         win.
             Marketing people are preoccupied with doing
         research and “getting the facts.” They analyze the situ-
         ation to make sure that truth is on their side. Then they
         sail confidently into the marketing arena, secure in the
         knowledge that they have the best product and that
         ultimately the best product will win.
             It’s an illusion. There is no objective reality. There
         are no facts. There are no best products. All that exists
         in the world of marketing are perceptions in the minds
         of the customer or prospect. The perception is the real-
         ity. Everything else is an illusion.
             All truth is relative. Relative to your mind or the
         mind of another human being. When you say, “I’m
         right and the next person is wrong,” all you’re really
         saying is that you’re a better perceiver than someone
         else.
             Most people think they are better perceivers than
         others. They have a sense of personal infallibility.
         Their perceptions are always more accurate than those
         of their neighbors or friends. Truth and perception
         become fused in the mind, leaving no difference
         between the two.
             It’s not easy to see that this is so. To cope with the
         terrifying reality of being alone in the universe, people
         project themselves on the outside world. They “live” in
         the arena of books, movies, television, newspapers,
         magazines. They “belong” to clubs, organizations,

                                      19
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 20




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         institutions. These outside representations of the world
         seem more real than the reality inside their own minds.
            People cling firmly to the belief that reality is the
         world outside of the mind and that the individual is
         one small speck on a global spaceship. Actually it’s
         the opposite. The only reality you can be sure about is
         in your own perceptions. If the universe exists, it
         exists inside your own mind and the minds of others.
         That’s the reality that marketing programs must deal
         with.
            There may well be oceans, rivers, cities, towns,
         trees, and houses out there, but there just isn’t any way
         for us to know these things except through our own
         perceptions. Marketing is a manipulation of those per-
         ceptions.
            Most marketing mistakes stem from the assumption
         that you’re fighting a product battle rooted in reality.
         All the laws in this book are derived from the exact
         opposite point of view.
            What some marketing people see as the natural laws
         of marketing are based on a flawed premise that the
         product is the hero of the marketing program and that
         you’ll win or lose based on the merits of the product.
         Which is why the natural, logical way to market a
         product is invariably wrong.
            Only by studying how perceptions are formed in the
         mind and focusing your marketing programs on those
         perceptions can you overcome your basically incorrect
         marketing instincts.
            Each of us (manufacturer, distributor, dealer,

                                       20
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 21




                           THE LAW OF PERCEPTION



         prospect, customer) looks at the world through a pair
         of eyes. If there is objective truth out there, how would
         we know it? Who would measure it? Who would tell
         us? It could only be another person looking at the same
         scene through a different pair of eye-windows.
            Truth is nothing more or less than one expert’s per-
         ception. And who is the expert? It’s someone who is
         perceived to be an expert in the mind of somebody else.
            If truth is so illusive, why is there so much discus-
         sion in marketing about the so-called facts? Why are
         so many marketing decisions based on factual compar-
         isons? Why do so many marketing people assume that
         truth is on their side, that their job is to use truth as a
         weapon to correct the misperceptions that exist in the
         mind of the prospect?
            Marketing people focus on facts because they
         believe in objective reality. It’s also easy for marketing
         people to assume that truth is on their side. If you think
         you need the best product to win a marketing battle,
         then it’s easy to believe you have the best product. All
         that’s required is a minor modification of your own
         perceptions.
            Changing a prospect’s mind is another matter.
         Minds of customers or prospects are very difficult to
         change. With a modicum of experience in a product
         category, a consumer assumes that he or she is right. A
         perception that exists in the mind is often interpreted
         as a universal truth. People are seldom, if ever, wrong.
         At least in their own minds.
            It’s easier to see the power of perception over prod-

                                      21
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 22




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         uct when the products are separated by some distance.
         For example, the three largest-selling Japanese import-
         ed cars in America are Honda, Toyota, and Nissan.
         Most marketing people think the battle between the
         three brands is based on quality, styling, horsepower,
         and price. Not true. It’s what people think about a
         Honda, a Toyota, or a Nissan that determines which
         brand will win. Marketing is a battle of perceptions.
            Japanese automobile manufacturers sell the same
         cars in the United States as they do in Japan. If mar-
         keting were a battle of products, you would think the
         same sales order would hold true for both countries.
         After all, the same quality, the same styling, the same
         horsepower, and roughly the same prices hold true for
         Japan as they do for the United States. But in Japan,
         Honda is nowhere near the leader. There, Honda is in
         third place, behind Toyota and Nissan. Toyota sells
         more than four times as many automobiles in Japan as
         Honda does.
            So what’s the difference between Honda in Japan
         and Honda in the United States? The products are the
         same, but the perceptions in customers’ minds are dif-
         ferent.
            If you told friends in New York you bought a
         Honda, they might ask you, “What kind of car did you
         get? a Civic? an Accord? a Prelude?” If you told
         friends in Tokyo you bought a Honda, they might ask
         you, “What kind of motorcycle did you buy?” In
         Japan, Honda got into customers’ minds as a manu-
         facturer of motorcycles, and apparently most people

                                       22
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 23




                           THE LAW OF PERCEPTION



         don’t want to buy a car from a motorcycle company.
            How about an opposite situation? Would Harley-
         Davidson be successful if it launched a Harley-
         Davidson automobile? You might think it would
         depend on the car. Quality, styling, horsepower, pric-
         ing. You might even believe the Harley-Davidson rep-
         utation for quality would be a plus. We think not. Its
         perception as a motorcycle company would undermine
         a Harley-Davidson car—no matter how good the prod-
         uct (chapter 12: The Law of Line Extension).
            Why is Campbell’s soup No. 1 in the United States
         and nowhere in the United Kingdom? Why is Heinz
         soup No. 1 in the United Kingdom and a failure in the
         United States? Marketing is a battle of perceptions, not
         products. Marketing is the process of dealing with
         those perceptions.
            Some soft-drink executives believe that marketing
         is a battle of taste. Well, New Coke is No. 1 in taste.
         (The Coca-Cola Company conducted 200,000 taste
         tests that “proved” that New Coke tastes better than
         Pepsi-Cola and Pepsi tastes better than their original
         formula, now called Coca-Cola Classic.) But who is
         winning the marketing battle? The drink that research
         has proven to taste the best, New Coke, is in third
         place. The one that research shows tastes the worst,
         Coca-Cola Classic, is in first place.
            You believe what you want to believe. You taste
         what you want to taste. Soft-drink marketing is a bat-
         tle of perceptions, not a battle of taste.
            What makes the battle even more difficult is that

                                      23
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 24




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         customers frequently make buying decisions based on
         second-hand perceptions. Instead of using their own
         perceptions, they base their buying decisions on some-
         one else’s perception of reality. This is the “everybody
         knows” principle.
            Everybody knows that the Japanese make higher-
         quality cars than the Americans do. So people make
         buying decisions based on the fact that everybody
         knows the Japanese make higher-quality cars. When
         you ask shoppers whether they have had any personal
         experience with a product, most often they say they
         haven’t. And, more often than not, their own experi-
         ence is often twisted to conform to their perceptions.
            If you have had a bad experience with a Japanese
         car, you’ve just been unlucky, because everybody
         knows the Japanese make high-quality cars.
         Conversely, if you have had a good experience with an
         American car, you’ve just been lucky, because every-
         body knows that American cars are poorly made.
            Everybody knows there’s a problem with Audi cars. On
         November 23, 1986, CBS broadcast a “60 Minutes” seg-
         ment called “Out of Control.” It called attention to a num-
         ber of complaints about Audi’s “unintended acceleration.”
         American sales of Audis fell through the floorboards—
         from 60,000 in 1986 to 12,000 in 1991. But have you ever
         personally had any problems with “unintended accelera-
         tion” while test-driving an Audi? It is unlikely. Every sin-
         gle automobile expert who has tested the car has failed to
         duplicate the complaint. Yet the perception lingers on.
            Recently Audi has been running advertisements

                                       24
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 25




                           THE LAW OF PERCEPTION



         comparing its cars to comparable cars made by
         Mercedes-Benz and BMW. According to the ads,
         German automotive experts rated Audi cars ahead of
         both Mercedes and BMW.
            Do you believe that? Probably not. Is it true? Does
         it matter?
            Marketing is not a battle of products. It’s a battle of
         perceptions.




                                      25
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 26




                            5
                        The Law of
                          Focus
             The most powerful concept in marketing
             is owning a word in the prospect’s mind.




                                       26
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 27




            A company can become incredibly successful if it
         can find a way to own a word in the mind of the
         prospect. Not a complicated word. Not an invented
         one. The simple words are best, words taken right out
         of the dictionary.
            This is the law of focus. You “burn” your way
         into the mind by narrowing the focus to a single
         word or concept. It’s the ultimate marketing sacri-
         fice.
            Federal Express was able to put the word overnight
         into the minds of its prospects because it sacrificed its
         product line and focused on overnight package deliv-
         ery only.
            In a way, the law of leadership—it’s better to be
         first than to be better—enables the first brand or
         company to own a word in the mind of the prospect.
         But the word the leader owns is so simple that it’s
         invisible.
            The leader owns the word that stands for the cat-
         egory. For example, IBM owns computer. This is
         another way of saying that the brand becomes a
         generic name for the category. “We need an IBM
         machine.” Is there any doubt that a computer is
         being requested?
            You can also test the validity of a leadership claim
         by a word association test. If the given words are com-
         puter, copier, chocolate bar, and cola, the four most
         associated words are IBM, Xerox, Hershey’s, and
         Coke.
            An astute leader will go one step further to solidify

                                      27
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 28




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         its position. Heinz owns the word ketchup. But Heinz
         went on to isolate the most important ketchup attrib-
         ute. “Slowest ketchup in the West” is how the compa-
         ny is preempting the thickness attribute. Owning the
         word slow helps Heinz maintain a 50 percent market
         share.
             If you’re not a leader, then your word has to have a
         narrow focus. Even more important, however, your
         word has to be “available” in your category. No one
         else can have a lock on it.
             You don’t have to be a linguistic genius to find a
         winner. Prego went against leader Ragu in the spaghet-
         ti sauce market and captured a 27 percent share with
         an idea borrowed from Heinz. Prego’s word is thicker.
             The most effective words are simple and benefit
         oriented. No matter how complicated the product, no
         matter how complicated the needs of the market, it’s
         always better to focus on one word or benefit rather
         than two or three or four.
             Also, there’s the halo effect. If you strongly estab-
         lish one benefit, the prospect is likely to give you a lot
         of other benefits, too. A “thicker” spaghetti sauce
         implies quality, nourishing ingredients, value, and so
         on. A “safer” car implies better design and engineer-
         ing.
             Whether the result of a deliberate program or not,
         most successful companies (or brands) are the ones
         that “own a word” in the mind of the prospect. (Some
         words, like Volkswagen’s fahrvergnugen, are not worth
         owning.) Here are a few examples:

                                       28
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 29




                              THE LAW OF FOCUS



            Crest. . . cavities
            Mercedes. . . engineering
            BMW. . . driving
            Volvo. . . safety
            Domino’s. . . home delivery
            Pepsi-Cola. . . youth
            Nordstrom. . . service

            Words come in different varieties. They can be ben-
         efit related (cavity prevention), service related (home
         delivery), audience related (younger people), or sales
         related (preferred brand).
            Although we’ve been touting that words stick in the
         mind, nothing lasts forever. There comes a time when
         a company must change words. It’s not an easy task.
         The recent history of Lotus Development Corporation
         demonstrates the nature of the problem.
            For a number of years, Lotus has owned the word
         spreadsheet. Lotus was synonymous with 1-2-3 and
         spreadsheet. But the world of spreadsheets is getting
         competitive, and the potential for growth is limited.
         Like other companies, Lotus wants to grow. How is the
         company to get beyond its single-product business?
            The conventional answer is to expand in all direc-
         tions, as IBM and Microsoft did. As a matter of fact,
         Lotus did some conventional line extension with the
         purchase of Ami Pro word processing software and the
         introduction of a number of new software products.
         Then Lotus regrouped to focus on a new concept called
         “groupware,” software products for networked PCs.

                                      29
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 30




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            Lotus was the first software company to develop a
         successful groupware product. If things work out, the
         company will eventually own a second word in the
         minds of its prospects.
            Unlike Microsoft, Lotus now has a corporate focus. It
         won’t happen overnight, but Lotus could develop a pow-
         erful long-term position in the software field. What
         overnight did for Federal Express and safety did for Volvo,
         groupware could do for Lotus Development Corporation.
            You can’t take somebody else’s word. What makes
         the Lotus strategy plausible is that the groupware word
         is not owned by any other company. Furthermore,
         there is an enormous industry trend toward networked
         computers. (More than half of all business computers
         are connected to a network. There’s even a new maga-
         zine called Network Computing.) Many companies see
         the advantage of owning a single word or concept
         (often called “the corporate vision”), but they neglect
         to be the first to preempt the word.
            What won’t work in marketing is leaving your own
         word in search of a word owned by others. This was
         the case with Atari, which owned the words video
         game. But the business turned out to be faddish, so in
         1982 it sailed off in a new direction. It wanted Atari to
         mean computers. CEO James Morgan laid it all out:
         “Atari’s strength as a name also tends to be its weak-
         ness. It is synonymous with video games. Atari must
         redefine its image and broaden its business definition
         to electronic consumer products.”
            Unfortunately for Mr. Morgan’s strategy a host of

                                       30
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 31




                              THE LAW OF FOCUS



         other companies, including Apple and IBM, owned the
         word he was after. Atari’s diversification was a disas-
         ter. But the real irony was in that another company
         arrived in 1986 and took over the concept Atari walked
         away from. The company was Nintendo, which today
         has 75 percent of a multibillion-dollar market. Who
         knows where Atari is these days?
             The essence of marketing is narrowing the focus.
         You become stronger when you reduce the scope of
         your operations. You can’t stand for something if you
         chase after everything.
             Some companies accept the need to narrow the focus
         and try to accomplish this strategy in ways that are self-
         defeating. “We’ll focus on the quality end of the market.
         We won’t get into the low end where the emphasis is on
         price.” The problem is that customers don’t believe you
         unless you restrict your business to high-priced products
         only, like Mercedes-Benz or BMW.
             General Motors tries to sell quality at all price lev-
         els. “Putting quality on the road” is their latest corpo-
         rate slogan. Every GM product includes the “Mark of
         Excellence.” Guess what they’re doing at Ford? The
         same thing. “Quality is Job 1,” say the Ford ads. Over
         at Chrysler, Lee Iacocca proclaimed, “We don’t want
         to be the biggest, we just want to be the best.” (Does
         anyone really believe that Iacocca doesn’t want to be
         the biggest?)
             This is great stuff inside the corporation. Total qual-
         ity, the path to greatness. It makes a terrific theme at
         dealer meetings, especially with the trumpet flourish-

                                      31
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 32




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         es and the dancers. But outside the corporation, the
         message falls apart. Does any company proclaim itself
         as the “unquality” corporation? No, everybody stands
         for quality. As a result, nobody does.
             You can’t narrow the focus with quality or any other
         idea that doesn’t have proponents for the opposite
         point of view. You can’t position yourself as an honest
         politician, because nobody is willing to take the oppo-
         site position (although there are plenty of potential
         candidates). You can, however, position yourself as the
         pro-business candidate or the pro-labor candidate and
         be instantly accepted as such because there is support
         for the other side.
             When you develop your word to focus on, be pre-
         pared to fend off the lawyers. They want to trademark
         everything you publish. The trick is to get others to use
         your word. (To be a leader you have to have followers.)
         It would be helpful for Lotus to have other companies
         get into the groupware business. It would make the
         category more important and people would be even
         more impressed with Lotus’s leadership.
             Once you have your word, you have to go out of your
         way to protect it in the marketplace. The case of BMW
         illustrates this very well. For years, BMW was the ulti-
         mate “driving” machine. Then the company decided to
         broaden its product line and chase Mercedes-Benz with
         large, 700-series sedans. The problem is, how can a liv-
         ing room on wheels be the ultimate driving machine?
         Not only can you not feel the road, but you’ll also crush
         all the pylons in your driving commercials.

                                       32
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 33




                              THE LAW OF FOCUS



             As a result, things started downhill for BMW.
         Luckily, it has recently introduced a new small BMW
         and is emphasizing “driving” once again. The compa-
         ny has regained its focus.
             The law of focus applies to whatever you’re selling,
         or even whatever you’re unselling. Like drugs, for
         example. The antidrug crusade on television and in
         magazines suffers from a lack of focus. There is no
         one word driven into the minds of drug users that
         could begin to unsell the drug concept. Antidrug
         advertising is all over the map.
             You’d think the antidrug forces (who, after all, are
         professionals) would have taken a leaf from the ama-
         teurs fighting the abortion issue. Both sides of the
         abortion issue have focused on single, powerful
         words—pro-life and pro-choice.
            The antidrug forces should do the same—focus on
         a single powerful word. What the campaign ought to
         do is make drugs what cigarettes are today, socially
         unacceptable. One word that could do this is the ulti-
         mate down word, loser. Since drug usage causes all
         kinds of losses (of job, family, self-esteem, freedom,
         life), a program that said “Drugs are for losers” could
         have a very powerful impact, especially on the recre-
         ational user, who is more concerned with social status
         than with getting high.
            The law of focus, a marketing law, could help solve
         one of society’s biggest problems.



                                      33
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 34




                            6
                        The Law of
                        Exclusivity
                     Two companies cannot own
               the same word in the prospect’s mind.




                                       34
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 35




            When a competitor owns a word or position in the
         prospect’s mind, it is futile to attempt to own the same
         word.
            As we mentioned earlier, Volvo owns safety. Many
         other automobile companies, including Mercedes-
         Benz and General Motors, have tried to run marketing
         campaigns based on safety. Yet no one except Volvo
         has succeeded in getting into the prospect’s mind with
         a safety message.
            The Atari story shows the futility of attempting to
         move in on the home computer position against well-
         entrenched competitors. A variation called game com-
         puter might have been possible because it would have
         taken advantage of the perception of Atari as a creator
         of computer games. But that’s about it. The home com-
         puter position belonged to Apple, Commodore, and
         others.
            Despite the disaster stories, many companies con-
         tinue to violate the law of exclusivity. You can’t change
         people’s minds once they are made up. In fact, what
         you often do is reinforce your competitor’s position by
         making its concept more important.
            Federal Express has walked away from overnight
         and is in the middle of trying to take worldwide away
         from DHL. “Overnight Letter” used to be emblazoned
         on Federal Express envelopes. Today you’ll find
         “FedEx Letter” instead. And its advertising no longer
         says, “When it absolutely, positively has to be there
         overnight.” Lately the word that has been appearing in
         Federal Express advertising is worldwide.

                                      35
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 36




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            This raises the all-important question: Can Federal
         Express ever own the worldwide word? Probably not.
         Someone else already owns it: DHL Worldwide
         Express. Its concept: Faster to more of the world. To
         succeed, Federal Express must find a way to narrow
         the focus against DHL. The company can’t do it by
         trying to own the same word in the prospect’s mind.
            Another massive marketing effort aimed at some-
         one else’s word can be found in bunny land—to be
         specific, the pink Energizer bunny that is trying to take
         the “long-lasting” concept away from Duracell. No
         matter how many bunnies Eveready throws into the
         fray, Duracell will still be able to hang onto the long-
         lasting word. Duracell got into the mind first and pre-
         empted the concept. Even the Dura part of the name
         communicates it.
            What often leads marketers down this booby-
         trapped lane is that wonderful stuff called research.
         Armies of researchers are employed, focus groups
         conducted, questionnaires tabulated—and what comes
         back in a three-pound report is a wish list of attributes
         that users want from a product or service. So if that’s
         what people want, that’s what we should give them.
            What’s the biggest problem people have with batter-
         ies? They go dead at the most inconvenient times. So
         what’s the No. 1 battery attribute? Long-lasting, of
         course. If long-lasting is what people want, that’s what
         we should advertise. Right? Wrong.
            What researchers never tell you is that some other
         company already owns the idea. They would rather

                                       36
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 37




                           THE LAW OF EXCLUSIVITY



         encourage clients to mount massive marketing pro-
         grams. The theory is that if you spend enough money,
         you can own the idea. Right? Wrong.
            Some years ago Burger King started down this slip-
         pery slope from which it has never quite recovered. A
         market study showed that the most popular attribute
         for fast food was “fast” (no big surprise there). So
         Burger King did what most red-blooded marketers do.
         It turned to its advertising agency and said, “If the
         world wants fast, our advertising should tell them
         we’re fast.”
            What was overlooked in the research was that
         McDonald’s was already perceived as being the fastest
         hamburger chain in the country. Fast belonged to
         McDonald’s. Undaunted by this, Burger King
         launched its campaign with the slogan “Best food for
         fast times.” The program quickly became a disaster
         very nearly on a par with the one that involved “Herb.”
         The advertising agency was fired, management was
         fired, the company was sold, and downward momen-
         tum was maintained.
            Many people have paid the price for violating the
         law of exclusivity.




                                      37
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 38




                             7
                        The Law of
                        the Ladder
                 The strategy to use depends on
               which rung you occupy on the ladder.




                                       38
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 39




            While being first into the prospect’s mind ought to
         be your primary marketing objective, the battle isn’t
         lost if you fail in this endeavor. There are strategies to
         use for No. 2 and No. 3 brands.
            All products are not created equal. There’s a hierar-
         chy in the mind that prospects use in making deci-
         sions.
            For each category, there is a product ladder in the
         mind. On each rung is a brand name. Take the car
         rental category. Hertz got into the mind first and
         wound up on the top rung. Avis got in second and
         National got in third.
            Your marketing strategy should depend on how
         soon you got into the mind and consequently which
         rung of the ladder you occupy. The higher the better, of
         course.
            Take Avis, for example. For years the company
         advertised the high quality of its rent-a-car service.
         “Finest in rent-a-cars” was one of its campaigns. The
         reader looked at the ad and wondered, How could they
         have the finest rent-a-car service when they’re not on
         the top rung of my ladder?
            Then Avis did the one thing you have to do to make
         progress inside the mind of the prospect. They
         acknowledged their position on the ladder. “Avis is
         only No. 2 in rent-a-cars. So why go with us? We try
         harder.”
            For 13 years in a row, Avis had lost money. Then,
         when it admitted to being No. 2, it started to make
         money, lots of money. Shortly thereafter, the company

                                      39
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 40




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         was sold to ITT, which promptly ordered up the adver-
         tising theme, “Avis is going to be No. 1.”
             No, they’re not, said the prospect. They’re not on
         the top rung of my ladder. And to make the point,
         many picked up the phone and called Hertz. The cam-
         paign was a disaster.
             Many marketing people have misread the Avis
         story. They assume the company was successful
         because it tried harder (i.e., it had the better service).
         But that wasn’t it at all. Avis was successful because it
         related itself to the position of Hertz in the mind. (If
         trying harder were the secret of success, Harold
         Stassen would have been president many times over.)
             Many marketers make the same mistake as Avis did.
         Currently, Adelphi University in Garden City, Long
         Island, is comparing itself (favorably) with Harvard.
         Wait a minute, says the high school senior, Adelphi is
         not on my college ladder. As you might expect, Adelphi
         is not very successful in attracting the top students.
             The mind is selective. Prospects use their ladders in
         deciding which information to accept and which infor-
         mation to reject. In general, a mind accepts only new
         data that is consistent with its product ladder in that
         category. Everything else is ignored.
             When Chrysler compared its cars with Honda, very
         few people traded in their Preludes and Accords for
         Plymouths and Dodges. The headline of one Chrysler
         ad said: “Comparing a used Dodge Spirit to a new
         Honda Accord seemed a little ridiculous. Until we saw
         the results.” According to the ad, 100 people were

                                       40
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 41




                           THE LAW OF THE LADDER



         asked to compare a Dodge Spirit with 70,000 miles on
         it to a new Honda Accord. The majority (58 out of
         100) chose the used Dodge.
             Ridiculous. (But not necessarily untrue.)
            What about your product’s ladder in the prospect’s
         mind? How many rungs are there on your ladder? It
         depends on whether your product is a high-interest or
         a low-interest product. Products you use every day
         (cigarettes, cola, beer, toothpaste, cereal) tend to be
         high-interest products with many rungs on their lad-
         ders. Products that are purchased infrequently (furni-
         ture, lawn mowers, luggage) usually have few rungs on
         their ladders.
            Products that involve a great deal of personal pride
         (automobiles, watches, cameras) are also high-interest
         products with many rungs on their ladders even though
         they are purchased infrequently.
            Products that are purchased infrequently and
         involve an unpleasant experience usually have very
         few rungs on their ladders. Automobile batteries, tires,
         and life insurance are three examples.
            The, ultimate product that involves the least amount
         of pleasure and is purchased once in a lifetime has no
         rungs on its ladder. Ever hear of Batesville caskets?
         Probably not, although the brand has almost 50 per-
         cent of the market.
            There’s a relationship between market share and
         your position on the ladder in the prospect’s mind. You
         tend to have twice the market share of the brand below
         you and half the market share of the brand above you.

                                      41
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 42




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            For example, Acura was the first Japanese luxury
         car Lexus was second. Infiniti was third. In a recent
         year, Acura sold 143,708 cars in the United States,
         Lexus sold 71,206 cars, and Infiniti sold 34,890. The
         relationship among the three brands is almost a math-
         ematically correct 4-2-1. (The Acura-Lexus-Infiniti
         battle is in its early stages, where the cars are new and
         there’s a lot of interest among the public and the press.
         In the long run, when the products are no longer excit-
         ing, another phenomenon occurs. See the next chapter:
         The Law of Duality.)
            Marketing people often talk about the “three lead-
         ing brands” in a category as if it were a battle of
         equals. It almost never is. The leader inevitably domi-
         nates the No. 2 brand and the No. 2 brand inevitably
         smothers No. 3. In baby food, it’s Gerber, Beech-Nut,
         and Heinz. In beer, it’s Budweiser, Miller, and Coors.
         In long-distance telephone service it’s AT&T, MCI,
         and Sprint.
            What’s the maximum number of rungs on a ladder?
         There seems to be a rule of seven in the prospect’s mind.
         Ask someone to name all the brands he or she remem-
         bers in a given category. Rarely will anyone name more
         than seven. And that’s for a high-interest category.
            According to Harvard psychologist Dr. George A.
         Miller, the average human mind cannot deal with
         more than seven units at a time. Which is why seven
         is a popular number for lists that have to be remem-
         bered. Seven-digit phone numbers, the seven wonders
         of the world, seven-card stud, Snow White and the

                                       42
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 43




                           THE LAW OF THE LADDER



         seven dwarfs, the seven danger signals of cancer.
            Sometimes your own ladder, or category, is too
         small. It might be better to be a small fish in a big
         pond than to be a big fish in a small pond. In other
         words, it’s sometimes better to be No. 3 on a big lad-
         der than No. 1 on a small ladder.
            The top rung of the lemon-lime soda ladder was
         occupied by 7-Up. (Sprite was on the second rung.) In
         the soft-drink field, however, the cola ladder is much
         bigger than the lemon-lime ladder. (Almost two out of
         three soft drinks consumed in America are cola
         drinks.) So 7-Up climbed on the cola ladder with a
         marketing campaign called “The Uncola.”
            As tea is to coffee, 7-Up became the alternative to a
         cola drink. And 7-Up sales climbed to where the brand
         was the third largest-selling soft drink in America.
            Unfortunately, in recent years 7-Up lost its grip on
         third place by violating one of the laws yet to be dis-
         cussed (chapter 12: The Law of Line Extension).
            The ladder is a simple, but powerful, analogy that
         can help you deal with the critical issues in marketing.
         Before starting any marketing program, ask yourself
         the following questions: Where are we on the ladder in
         the prospect’s mind? On the top rung? On the second
         rung? Or maybe we’re not on the ladder at all.
            Then make sure your program deals realistically
         with your position on the ladder. More on how to do
         this later.



                                      43
22 Laws of Marketing    10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 44




                             8
                         The Law of
                          Duality
                       In the long run, every market
                         becomes a two-horse race.




                                        44
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 45




             Early on, a new category is a ladder of many rungs.
         Gradually, the ladder becomes a two-rung affair.
             In batteries, it’s Eveready and Duracell. In photo-
         graphic film, it’s Kodak and Fuji. In rent-a-cars, it’s
         Hertz and Avis. In mouthwash, it’s Listerine and
         Scope. In hamburgers, it’s McDonald’s and Burger
         King. In sneakers, it’s Nike and Reebok. In toothpaste,
         it’s Crest and Colgate.
             When you take the long view of marketing, you
         find the battle usually winds up as a titanic struggle
         between two major players—usually the old reliable
         brand and the upstart.
             Back in 1969, there were three major brands of a
         certain product. The leader had about 60 percent of
         the market, the No. 2 brand had a 25 percent share,
         and the No. 3 brand had a 6 percent share. The rest
         of the market included either private label or minor
         brands. The law of duality suggests that these mar-
         ket shares are unstable. Furthermore, the law pre-
         dicts that the leader will lose market share and No.
         2 will gain.
             Twenty-two years later, the leader dropped down to
         45 percent of the market. The No. 2 brand has 40 per-
         cent, and No. 3 has 3 percent. The products are Coca-
         Cola, Pepsi-Cola, and Royal Crown cola, respectively,
         but the principles apply to brands everywhere.
             Look at the three long-distance telephone compa-
         nies. AT&T has 65 percent of the market, MCI has 17
         percent, and Sprint has 10 percent. Who will win and
         who will lose in the telephone wars? While the future

                                      45
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 46




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         is unknowable (chapter 17: The Law of
         Unpredictability), a betting person would put his or
         her money on MCI. MCI has won the battle with
         Sprint for second place, so now MCI ought to become
         the upstart alternative to old, reliable AT&T.
            Sprint is probably feeling very comfortable on the
         third rung of the ladder. Nine percent doesn’t sound
         like much, but it translates to $6 billion in annual
         sales. And the market has been growing rapidly.
            For the long term, however, Sprint is in serious trou-
         ble. Look what happened to Royal Crown cola. Back
         in 1969, the Royal Crown company revitalized its fran-
         chise system, 350 bottlers strong, and hired the former
         president of Rival Pet Foods and a veteran of both
         Coke and Pepsi. The company also retained Wells,
         Rich, Greene, a high-powered New York advertising
         agency. “We’re out to kill Coke and Pepsi,” declared
         Mary Wells Lawrence, the agency’s head, to the Royal
         Crown bottlers. “I hope you’ll excuse the word, but
         we’re really out for the jugular.”
            The only brand that got killed was Royal Crown. In
         a maturing industry, third place is a difficult position
         to be in.
            Take the domestic automobile industry. In spite of
         heroic measures undertaken by Lee Iacocca, Chrysler is
         in trouble. In the long run, marketing is a two-car race.
            Take video games. In the late eighties, the market
         was dominated by Nintendo with a 75 percent share.
         The two also-rans were Sega and NEC. Today
         Nintendo and Sega are neck and neck, and NEC is way

                                       46
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 47




                             THE LAW OF DUALITY



         behind. In the long run, marketing is a two-game race.
            Time frames, however, can vary. The fast-moving
         video game market played itself out in two or three
         seasons. The long-distance telephone market might
         take two or three decades.
            Take the airline industry. American Airlines, with
         20 percent of the market, got its nose out in front and
         will probably wind up as the Coca-Cola of the skies.
         The interesting battle is between Delta and United,
         tied at 18 percent apiece. One of these two will take
         off like Pepsi—the other is headed down with Royal
         Crown. In the long run, marketing is a two-airline
         race.
            Are these results preordained? Of course not. There
         are other laws of marketing that can also affect the
         results. Furthermore, your marketing programs can
         strongly influence your sales, provided they are in tune
         with the laws of marketing. When you’re a weak No.
         3, like Royal Crown, you aren’t going to make much
         progress by going out and attacking the two strong
         leaders. What they could have done is carved out a
         profitable niche for themselves (chapter 5: The Law of
         Focus).
            Knowing that marketing is a two-horse race in the
         long run can help you plan strategy in the short run.
            It often happens that there is no clearcut No. 2.
         What happens next depends upon how skillful the con-
         tenders are. Take the laptop computer field. Toshiba is
         in first place with 21 percent of the market. But there
         are five companies in second place.

                                      47
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 48




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         Zenith, Compaq, NEC, Tandy, and Sharp each have
         between 8 and 10 percent of the market. It ought to be
         fun to watch six horses come around a turn where
         there’s room for only two. Toshiba and who? Which
         one will finish second?
            What’s especially tragic from the economy’s point
         of view are the resources wasted in many high-visibil-
         ity categories like laptop computers. Currently there
         are 130 laptop brands on the market. The law of dual-
         ity will see to it that very few of these brands will be
         around in the twenty-first century.
            Look at the history of the automobile in the United
         States. In 1904, 195 different cars were assembled by
         60 companies. Within the following 10 years, 531 com-
         panies were formed and 346 perished. By 1923, only
         108 car makers remained. This number dropped to 44
         by 1927. Today, Ford and General Motors dominate the
         domestic industry, with Chrysler’s future in doubt.
            Successful marketers concentrate on the top two
         rungs. Jack Welch, the legendary chairman and CEO
         of General Electric, said recently: “Only businesses
         that are No. 1 or No. 2 in their markets could win in
         the increasingly competitive global arena. Those that
         could not were fixed, closed, or sold.” It’s this kind of
         thinking that built companies like Procter & Gamble
         into the powerhouses they are. In 32 of its 44 product
         categories in the United States, P&G commands the
         No. 1 or No. 2 brands.
            Early on, in a developing market, the No. 3 or No.
         4 positions look attractive. Sales are increasing. New,

                                       48
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 49




                             THE LAW OF DUALITY



         relatively unsophisticated customers are coming into
         the market. These customers don’t always know which
         brands are the leaders, so they pick ones that look
         interesting or attractive. Quite often, these turn out to
         be the No. 3 or No. 4 brands.
            As time goes on, however, these customers get edu-
         cated. They want the leading brand, based on the naive
         assumption that the leading brand must be better.
            We repeat: The customer believes that marketing is
         a battle of products. It’s this kind of thinking that keeps
         the two brands on top: “They must be the best, they’re
         the leaders.”




                                      49
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 50




                            9
                        The Law of
                       the Opposite
              If you are shooting for second place,
            your strategy is determined by the leader.




                                       50
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 51




            In strength there is weakness. Wherever the leader
         is strong, there is an opportunity for a would-be No. 2
         to turn the tables.
            Much like a wrestler uses his opponent’s strength
         against him, a company should leverage the leader’s
         strength into a weakness.
            If you want to establish a firm foothold on the sec-
         ond rung of the ladder, study the firm above you.
         Where is it strong? And how do you turn that strength
         into a weakness?
            You must discover the essence of the leader and
         then present the prospect with the opposite. (In other
         words, don’t try to be better, try to be different.) It’s
         often the upstart versus old reliable.
            Coca-Cola is a 100-year-old product. Only
         seven people in the history of the world have
         known the Coke formula, which is kept locked in a
         safe in Atlanta. Coca-Cola is the old, established
         product. However, using the law of the opposite,
         Pepsi-Cola reversed the essence of Coca-Cola to
         become the choice of a new generation: the Pepsi
         Generation.
            When you look at customers in a given product cat-
         egory, there seem to be two kinds of people. There are
         those who want to buy from the leader and there are
         those who don’t want to buy from the leader. A poten-
         tial No. 2 has to appeal to the latter group.
            In other words, by positioning yourself against the
         leader, you take business away from all the other
         alternatives to No. 1. If old people drink Coke and

                                      51
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 52




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         young people drink Pepsi, there’s nobody left to drink
         Royal Crown cola.
            Yet, too many potential No. 2 brands try to emulate
         the leader. This usually is an error. You must present
         yourself as the alternative.
            Time built its reputation on colorful writing. So
         Newsweek turned the idea around and focused on a
         straightforward writing style: “We separate facts from
         opinions.” In other words, Newsweek puts its opinions
         in the editorial columns, not in the news columns.
            Sometimes you need to be brutal. Scope, the good-
         tasting mouthwash, hung the “medicine breath” label
         on its Listerine competition.
            But don’t simply knock the competition. The law of
         the opposite is a two-edge sword. It requires honing in
         on a weakness that your prospect will quickly
         acknowledge. (One whiff of Listerine and you know
         that your mouth would smell like a hospital.) Then
         quickly twist the sword. (Scope is the good-tasting
         mouthwash that kills germs.)
            Also in the mouthwash field is an interesting
         example of the futility of trying to emulate the leader.
         In 1961, Johnson & Johnson introduced Micrin
         mouthwash, focusing on its “scientific” virtues.
         Within months Micrin became the No. 2 brand. But
         with its germ-fighting approach, Listerine was also a
         scientific brand. So in 1965, when Procter & Gamble
         introduced Scope, it had the “opposite” position to
         itself. Scope went on to become the No. 2 mouth-
         wash. By 1978, when Johnson & Johnson withdrew

                                       52
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 53




                          THE LAW OF THE OPPOSITE



         the product from the market, Micrin’s share had fall-
         en to 1 percent.
             When Beck’s beer arrived in the United States, it had
         a problem. It couldn’t be the first imported beer (that
         was Heineken), nor could it be the first German import-
         ed beer (that was Lowenbrau). It solved its problem by
         repositioning Lowenbrau. “You’ve tasted the German
         beer that’s the most popular in America. Now taste the
         German beer that’s the most popular in Germany.”
             Today Beck’s is the second largest-selling European
         beer in America. (When it comes to beer, Americans
         trust German mouths more than they do their own
         mouths.) This is a rare example of overturning the law
         of leadership and manipulating perceptions in the
         mind. (All this is academic today, since Lowenbrau is
         now brewed in America.)
             As a product gets old, it often accrues some nega-
         tive baggage. This is especially true in the medical
         field. Take aspirin, a product introduced in 1899. With
         thousands of medical studies conducted on aspirin,
         someone was bound to find flaws in the product. Sure
         enough, they found stomach bleeding—just in time for
         the 1955 launch of Tylenol.
             With all the “stomach bleeding” publicity, Tylenol
         quickly was able to set itself up as the alternative. “For
         the millions who should not take aspirin,” said the
         Tylenol advertising. Today Tylenol outsells aspirin and
         is the largest-selling single product in American drug-
         stores.
             Stolichnaya was able to hang the label of “fake

                                      53
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 54




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         Russian vodka” on American vodkas such as
         Smirnoff, Samovar, and Wolfschmidt by simply point-
         ing out that they come from places like Hartford
         (Connecticut), Schenley (Pennsylvania), and
         Lawrenceburg (Indiana). Stolichnaya comes from
         Leningrad (Russia), making it the real thing.
             There has to be a ring of truth about the negative if
         it is to be effective. One of the classic examples of
         hanging a negative on a competitor is an advertisement
         that Royal Doulton China ran about its main U.S. com-
         petitor. The headline said it all: “Royal Doulton, the
         china of Stoke-on-Trent, England vs. Lenox, the china
         of Pomona, New Jersey.” The ad exploited the fact that
         many people thought Lenox was an imported china.
         By repositioning Lenox where it really belonged, in
         Pomona, New Jersey, Royal Doulton was able to estab-
         lish itself as the “real English china.” Reason: Most
         people have a hard time imagining craftsmen making
         fine white-bone china in a tacky-sounding place like
         Pomona, New Jersey. (When the folks in England saw
         the ad, they howled with laughter. It turns out that
         Stoke-on-Trent is just as tacky as Pomona.)
             Marketing is often a battle for legitimacy. The first
         brand that captures the concept is often able to portray
         its competitors as illegitimate pretenders.
             A good No. 2 can’t afford to be timid. When you
         give up focusing on No. 1, you make yourself vulner-
         able not only to the leader but to the rest of the pack.
         Take the sad story of Burger King in recent years.
         Times have been difficult for this No. 2 in hamburgers.

                                       54
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 55




                          THE LAW OF THE OPPOSITE



         It has been through many management changes, new
         owners, and a parade of advertising agencies. It does-
         n’t take much of a history review to see what went
         wrong.
            Burger King’s most successful years came when it
         was on the attack. It opened with “Have it your way,”
         which twitted McDonald’s mass-manufacturing
         approach to hamburgers. Then it hit McDonald’s with
         “Broiling, not frying” and “The Whopper beats the big
         Mac.” All these programs reinforced the No. 2, alter-
         native position.
            Then, for some unknown reason, Burger King
         ignored the law of the opposite. It got timid and
         stopped attacking McDonald’s. The world was intro-
         duced to “Herb the nerd,” “The best food for fast
         times,” “We do it the way you do it,” “You’ve got to
         break the rules,” and on and on. It even started a pro-
         gram to attract little kids, the mainstay of McDonald’s
         strength.
            This is no way to stay a strong No. 2. Burger King’s
         sales per unit declined and have never returned to the
         level they were when it was on the attack.
            Burger King made the mistake of not taking the
         opposite tack.




                                      55
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 56




                            10
                        The Law of
                         Division
               Over time, a category will divide and
                 become two or more categories.




                                       56
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 57




            Like an amoeba dividing in a petri dish, the market-
         ing arena can be viewed as an ever-expanding sea of
         categories.
            A category starts off as a single entity. Computers,
         for example. But over time, the category breaks up into
         other segments. Mainframes, minicomputers, worksta-
         tions, personal computers, laptops, notebooks, pen
         computers.
            Like the computer, the automobile started off
         as a single category. Three brands (Chevrolet,
         Ford, and Plymouth) dominated the market. Then
         the category divided. Today we have luxury cars,
         moderately priced cars, and inexpensive cars.
         Full-size, intermediates, and compacts. Sports
         cars, four-wheel-drive vehicles, RVs, and mini-
         vans.
            In the television industry, ABC, CBS, and NBC
         once accounted for 90 percent of the viewing audi-
         ence. Now we have network, independent, cable, pay,
         and public television, and soon we’ll have instore and
         interactive television.
            Beer started the same way. Today we have
         imported and domestic beer. Premium and popular-
         priced beers. Light, draft, and dry beers. Even non-
         alcoholic beer.
            The law of division even affects countries.
         (Witness the mess in Yugoslavia.) In 1776, there were
         about 35 empires, kingdoms, countries, and states in
         the world. By World War II, the number had doubled.
         By 1970, there were more than 130 countries. Today,

                                      57
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 58




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         some 190 countries are generally recognized as sover-
         eign nations.
            Look at the music field. It used to be classical and
         popular music. To stay on top of the popular music
         field you could watch “Your Hit Parade,” which fea-
         tured the top 10 hits of the week. Radio adopted the
         same idea with a “Top 40” format. Today Top 40 is
         falling apart because there isn’t one list anymore.
            Billboard, the bible of the music business, has 11
         separate hit lists: classical, contemporary jazz, coun-
         try, crossover, dance, Latin, jazz, pop, rap, rhythm and
         blues, and rock. And 11 leaders for the 11 categories.
         They recently included Itzhak Perlman, Four-play,
         Garth Brooks, Luciano Pavarotti, Michael Jackson, Mi
         Mayor Necesidad, Dave Grusin, Enya, Public Enemy,
         Vanessa Williams, and Bruce Springsteen.
            Each segment is a separate, distinct entity. Each seg-
         ment has its own reason for existence. And each segment
         has its own leader, which is rarely the same as the leader
         of the original category. IBM is the leader in main-
         frames, DEC in minis, Sun in workstations, and so on.
            Instead of understanding this concept of division,
         many corporate leaders hold the naive belief that cate-
         gories are combining. Synergy and its kissing cousin
         the corporate alliance are the buzzwords in the board-
         rooms of America. IBM, according to the New York
         Times, is poised “to take advantage of the coming con-
         vergence of whole industries, including television,
         music, publishing and computing.”
            “IBM’s strongest suit,” says the Times, “in the

                                       58
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 59




                             THE LAW OF DIVISION



         expected convergence of cable and telephone networks
         with computer and television manufacturers may be
         technology that it has developed to create extremely high-
         speed networks.” (See chapter 20: The Law of Hype.)
            It won’t happen. Categories are dividing, not com-
         bining.
            Also look at the much-touted category called
         “financial services.” In the future, according to the
         press, we won’t have banks, insurance companies,
         stockbrokers, or mortgage lenders. We’ll have finan-
         cial services companies. It hasn’t happened yet.
            Prudential, American Express, and others have fall-
         en into the financial services trap. Customers don’t
         buy financial services. They buy stocks or life insur-
         ance or bank accounts. And they prefer to buy each
         service from a different company.
            The way for the leader to maintain its dominance is
         to address each emerging category with a different
         brand name, as General Motors did in the early days
         with Chevrolet, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, and
         Cadillac (and recently with Geo and Saturn).
            Companies make a mistake when they try to take a
         well-known brand name in one category and use the
         same brand name in another category. A classic exam-
         ple is the fate that befell Volkswagen, the company that
         introduced the small-car category to America. Its
         Beetle was a big winner that grabbed 67 percent of the
         imported-car market in the United States.
            Volkswagen was so successful that it began to
         think it could be like General Motors and sell bigger,

                                      59
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 60




                  THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         faster, and sportier cars. So it swept up whatever
         models it was making in Germany and shipped them
         all to the United States. But unlike GM, it used the
         same brand, Volkswagen, for all of its models.
             “Different Volks for different folks,” said the adver-
         tising, which featured five different models, including
         the Beetle, the 412 Sedan, the Dasher, the Thing, and
         even a station wagon. Needless to say, the only thing
         that kept selling was the “small” thing, the Beetle.
             Well, Volkswagen found a way to fix that. It stopped
         selling the Beetle in the United States and started sell-
         ing a new family of big, fast, expensive Volkswagens.
         Now you had the Vanagon, the Sirocco, the Jetta, the
         Golf GL, and the Cabriolet. It even built a plant in
         Pennsylvania to build these wondrous new cars.
             Unfortunately for Volkswagen, the small-car cate-
         gory continued to expand. And since people couldn’t
         buy a long-lasting, economical VW, they shifted to
         Toyota, Honda, and Nissan.
             Today Volkswagen’s 67 percent share has shrunk to
         less than 4 percent.
             Volkswagen isn’t some minor European brand like Saab
         or Alfa Romeo. Volkswagen is the largest-selling automotive
         brand in Europe. The cars VW sells in the United States are
         the same as the ones it sells in Europe. Only the minds of the
         people buying them are different. In America, Volkswagen
         means small and ugly. Nobody here wants to buy a big,
         beautiful Volkswagen (chapter 4: The Law of Perception).
             One of Volkswagen’s competitors, Honda, decided
         to go up-market. Rather than use the Honda name in

                                       60
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 61




                             THE LAW OF DIVISION



         the luxury-car market, it introduced the Acura. It even
         took the expensive step of setting up separate Acura
         dealerships to avoid confusion with Honda.
            The Acura became the first Japanese luxury car in
         the United States, where today Honda sells many more
         Acuras than Volkswagen sells Volkswagens. Honda
         now has the leading brand in two categories.
            What keeps leaders from launching a different
         brand to cover a new category is the fear of what will
         happen to their existing brands. General Motors was
         slow to react to the superpremium category that
         Mercedes-Benz and BMW established. One reason
         was that a new brand on top of Cadillac would enrage
         GM’s Cadillac dealers.
            Eventually, GM tried to take Cadillac up-market
         with the $54,000 Allante. It bombed. Why would any-
         one spend that kind of money on a so-called Cadillac,
         since their neighbors would probably think they paid
         only $30,000 or so? No prestige.
            A better strategy for General Motors might have
         been to put a new brand into the Mercedes market.
         (They might have brought back the classic LaSalle.)
            Timing is also important. You can be too early to
         exploit a new category. Back in the fifties the Nash
         Rambler was America’s first small car. But American
         Motors didn’t have either the courage or the money to
         hang in there long enough for the category to develop.
            It’s better to be early than late. You can’t get into the
         prospect’s mind first unless you’re prepared to spend
         some time waiting for things to develop.

                                      61
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 62




                            11
                        The Law of
                        Perspective
                    Marketing effects take place
                  over an extended period of time.




                                       62
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 63




            Is alcohol a stimulant or a depressant?
            If you visit almost any bar and grill on a Friday
         night after work, you’d swear that alcohol was a stim-
         ulant. The noise and laughter are strong evidence of
         alcohol’s stimulating effects. Yet at 4:00 in the morn-
         ing, when you see a few happy-hour customers sleep-
         ing it off in the streets, you’d swear that alcohol is a
         depressant.
            Chemically, alcohol is a strong depressant. But in
         the short term, by depressing a person’s inhibitions,
         alcohol acts like a stimulant.
            Many marketing moves exhibit the same phenome-
         non. The long-term effects are often the exact opposite
         of the short-term effects.
            Does a sale increase a company’s business or
         decrease it? Obviously, in the short term, a sale
         increases business. But there’s more and more evi-
         dence to show that sales decrease business in the long
         term by educating customers not to buy at “regular”
         prices.
            Aside from the fact that you can buy something for
         less, what does a sale say to a prospect? It says that
         your regular prices are too high. After the sale is over,
         customers tend to avoid a store with a “sale” reputa-
         tion.
            To maintain volume, retail outlets find they have to
         run almost continuous sales. It’s not unusual to walk
         down a retail block and find a dozen stores in a row
         with “Sale” signs in their windows.
            Have the automobile rebate programs increased

                                      63
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 64




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         sales? The rise of auto rebates have coincided with a
         decline in auto sales. U.S. vehicle sales have declined
         for five straight years in a row.
             The largest furniture company in the New York City
         area, Seamans, has been running a sale every week.
         Recently, Seamans went bankrupt.
             There is no evidence that couponing increases sales
         in the long run. Many companies find they need a
         quarterly dose of couponing to keep sales on an even
         keel. Once they stop couponing, sales drop off.
             In other words, you keep those coupons rolling out
         not to increase sales but to keep sales from falling off
         if you stop. Couponing is a drug. You continue to do it
         because the withdrawal symptoms are just too painful.
             Any sort of couponing, discounts, or sales tends to
         educate consumers to buy only when they can get a
         deal. What if a company never started couponing in
         the first place? In the retail field the big winners are
         the companies that practice “everyday low prices”—
         companies like Wal-Mart and K Mart and the rapidly
         growing warehouse outlets.
             Yet almost everywhere you look you see yo-yo pric-
         ing. The airlines and the supermarkets are two exam-
         ples. Recently, however, Procter & Gamble made a
         bold move to establish uniform pricing, which could
         become the start of a trend.
             In everyday life there are many examples of short-
         term gains and long-term losses, crime being a typi-
         cal example. If you rob a bank for $100,000 and wind
         up spending 10 years in jail, you either made

                                       64
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 65




                           THE LAW OF PERSPECTIVE



         $100,000 for a day’s work or $10,000 a year for 10
         years of labor. It depends on your point of view.
             Inflation can give an economy a short-term jolt, but
         in the long run, inflation leads to recession. (The nuts
         in Brazil haven’t figured this out yet.)
             In the short term, overeating satisfies the psyche,
         but in the long run it causes obesity and depression.
             In many other areas of life (spending money, taking
         drugs, having sex) the long-term effects of your actions
         are often the opposite’ of the short-term effects. Why
         then is it so hard to comprehend that marketing effects
         take place over an extended period of time?
             Take line extension. In the short term, line extension
         invariably increases sales. The beer industry clearly
         illustrates this effect. In the early seventies, Miller High
         Life was barreling along with sales increases averaging
         27 percent a year. Miller’s success was fueled by
         “Miller Time,” a blue-collar campaign focused on
         rewarding yourself at the end of the day with a Miller
         beer. Then Miller got greedy and in 1974 introduced
         Miller Lite, a brilliant concept (chapter 2: The Law of
         the Category) buried under a line extended name.
             In the short term the two Millers could coexist: the
         blue-collar beer (High Life) and the yuppie beer (Lite).
         But in the long term, line extension was bound to
         undermine one or the other brand.
             The high-water mark for Miller High Life was
         1979, five years after the introduction of Miller Lite.
         In those five years Miller High Life’s annual sales
         almost tripled, from 8.6 million to 23.6 million barrels.

                                      65
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 66




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         This was the short-term effect of line extension.
            The long-term effect was grim. From a high of 23.6
         million barrels in 1979, Miller High Life declined 13
         years in a row to just 5.8 million barrels in 1991. And
         the decline is bound to continue.
            Nor has Miller Lite been immune to the ravages of
         line extension. In 1986, the brewer introduced Miller
         Genuine Draft. The brand took because it was the first
         beer in a new category. Unfortunately, the brand also car-
         ried the Miller name. (See the next chapter: The Law of
         Line Extension.) History repeats itself. Five years later,
         Miller Lite peaked in sales and then started to decline.
         Once started, the decline is almost impossible to stop.
            Unless you know what to look for, it’s hard to see
         the effects of line extension, especially for managers
         focused on their next quarterly report. (If a bullet took
         five years to reach a target, very few criminals would
         be convicted of homicide.)
            The same thing that happened to Miller happened to
         Michelob. Three years after the introduction of Michelob
         Light, regular Michelob peaked in sales and then
         declined 11 years in a row. Today the four Michelob fla-
         vors combined (regular, light, dry, and classic dark) sell
         25 percent fewer barrels than Michelob alone did in
         1978, the year Michelob Light was introduced.
            The same thing happened to Coors. The introduc-
         tion of Coors Light caused the collapse of Coors regu-
         lar, which today sells one-fourth of what it used to.
            Even the king is down. After annual sales increases
         stretching back to the end of Prohibition, Budweiser

                                       66
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 67




                           THE LAW OF PERSPECTIVE



         has been slipping the last three years in a row. The
         cause? Bud Light.
            You might be thinking that Miller, Coors, and
         Anheuser-Busch had to line extend because light beer
         has taken over the market. If you believe what you read
         in the papers, you’d think that everyone is drinking
         light beer. Not true. Today, 18 years after the introduc-
         tion of Miller Lite, light beer still accounts for only 31
         percent of the beer market.
            In other areas of marketing, the short-term/long-
         term line extension effects occur much more rapidly.
         Coca-Cola clothes were introduced by Murjani in
         1985. Two years later wholesale volume reached $250
         million. The following year, the line dried up virtually
         overnight, saddling Murjani with millions of dollars’
         worth of inventory.
            What happened to Coca-Cola clothes also happened
         to Donald Trump. At first, The Donald was successful.
         Then he branched out and put his name on anything
         the banks would lend him money for. What’s a Trump?
         A hotel, three casinos, two condominiums, one airline,
         one shopping center.
            Fortune magazine called Trump “an investor with a
         keen eye for cash flow and asset values, a smart mar-
         keter, a cunning wheeler-dealer.” Time and Newsweek
         put The Donald on their covers.
            Today Trump is $1.4 billion in debt. What made
         him successful in the short term is exactly what caused
         him to fail in the long term. Line extension.
            It looks easy, but marketing is not a game for amateurs.

                                      67
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 68




                        12
                   The Law of
                  Line Extension
             There’s an irresistible pressure to extend
                     the equity of the brand.




                                       68
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 69




             If violating any of our laws was a punishable
         offense, a large portion of corporate America would be
         in jail.
             By far the most violated law in our book is the law
         of line extension. What’s even more diabolical is that
         line extension is a process that takes place continuous-
         ly, with almost no conscious effort on the part of the
         corporation. It’s like a closet or a desk drawer that fills
         up with almost no effort on your part.
             One day a company is tightly focused on a single
         product that is highly profitable. The next day the
         same company is spread thin over many products and
         is losing money.
             Take IBM. Years ago when IBM was focused on
         mainframe computers, the company made a ton of
         money. Today IBM is into everything and barely
         breaking even. In 1991, for example, IBM’s revenues
         were $65 billion. Yet the company wound up losing
         $2.8 billion. That’s almost $8 million a day.
             In addition to selling mainframe computers, IBM
         markets personal computers, pen computers, worksta-
         tions, midrange computers, software, networks, tele-
         phones, you name it. IBM even tried to get into the
         home computer market with the PCjr.
             Along the way, IBM dropped millions on copiers (sold
         to Kodak), Rolm (sold to Siemens), Satellite Business
         Systems (shut down), the Prodigy network (limping
         along), SAA, TopView, OfficeVision, and OS/2.
             When a company becomes incredibly successful, it
         invariably plants the seeds for its future problems.

                                      69
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 70




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         Take Microsoft, the most successful company in the
         software field. (Even though the company is one-fifti-
         eth the size of General Motors, Microsoft’s stock is
         worth more than GM’s.) What is Microsoft’s strategy?
         In a word, more.
            “Microsoft Corp. said it is aggressively seeking the
         dominant share in every major software applications
         category in the personal computer field,” said the Wall
         Street Journal recently. “Michael Maples, senior vice
         president of Microsoft’s applications division, suggest-
         ed that Microsoft might be able to achieve as much as
         a 70 percent share in every major applications catego-
         ry,” continued the Journal.
            Whom does that sound like? Sounds like IBM.
         Microsoft is setting itself up as the next IBM, with all
         the negative implications the name suggests.
            Microsoft is the leader in personal computer operat-
         ing systems, but it trails the leaders in each of the fol-
         lowing major categories: spreadsheets (Lotus is the
         leader), word processing (WordPerfect is the leader),
         and business graphics (Harvard Graphics from SPC
         Software Publishing is the leader).
            Microsoft keeps puffing itself up by expanding into
         new categories, such as pen computers. Recently,
         Microsoft bought Fox Software for $170 million in order
         to get into the data base software field. (What do you bet
         the company kills the Fox and changes it to Microsoft?)
            There are ominous signs of softness in Microsoft’s
         strategy. The Economist reported in early 1992, “Mr.
         Gates is putting together a range of products, based

                                       70
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 71




                         THE LAW OF LINE EXTENSION



         on a common core of technology, that will compete
         across virtually the whole of the software industry:
         from big computers to small ones, and from operat-
         ing systems in the information engine-room to graph-
         ics programs that draw every picture for executives.
         Nobody in the software industry has yet managed a
         venture of that complexity—though IBM has tried
         and failed.”
            When you try to be all things to all people, you
         inevitably wind up in trouble. “I’d rather be strong
         somewhere,” said one manager, “than weak every-
         where.”
            In a narrow sense, line extension involves taking the
         brand name of a successful product (e.g., A-1 steak
         sauce) and putting it on a new product you plan to
         introduce (e.g., A-1 poultry sauce).
            It sounds so logical. “We make A-1, a great sauce
         that gets the dominant share of the steak business. But
         people are switching from beef to chicken, so let’s intro-
         duce a poultry product. And what better name to use
         than A-1. That way people will know the poultry sauce
         comes from the makers of that great steak sauce, A-1.”
            But marketing is a battle of perception, not product.
         In the mind, A-1 is not the brand name, but the steak
         sauce itself. “Would you pass me the A-1?” asks the
         diner. Nobody replies: “A-1 what?”
            In spite of an $18 million advertising budget, the A-
         1 poultry launch was a dismal failure.
            There are as many ways to line extend as there are
         galaxies in the universe. And new ways get invented

                                      71
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 72




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         every day. In the long run and in the presence of seri-
         ous competition, line extensions almost never work.
             Creating flavors is a popular way to try to grab mar-
         ket share. More flavors, more share. Sounds right, but
         it doesn’t work.
             Back in 1978, when 7-Up was simply the lemon-
         lime uncola, it had a 5.7 percent share of the soft-drink
         market. Then the company added 7-Up Gold, Cherry
         7-Up, and assorted diet versions. Today 7-Up’s share is
         down to 2.5 percent.
             Wherever you look, you’ll find line extensions,
         which is one reason why stores are choked with
         brands. (There are 1,300 shampoos, 200 cereals, 250
         soft drinks.)
             Invariably, the leader in any category is the brand
         that is not line extended. Take baby food, for example.
         Gerber has 72 percent of the market, way ahead of
         Beech-Nut and Heinz, the two line-extended brands.
             In spite of evidence that line extensions don’t work,
         companies continue to pump them out. Here are some
         examples:

            Ivory soap. Ivory shampoo?
            Life Savers candy. Life Savers gum?
            Bic lighters. Bic pantyhose?
            Chanel. Chanel for men?
            Tanqueray gin. Tanqueray vodka?
            Coors beer. Coors water?
            Heinz ketchup. Heinz baby food?
            USA Today. “USA Today on TV”?

                                       72
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 73




                         THE LAW OF LINE EXTENSION



            Adidas running shoes. Adidas cologne?
            Pierre Cardin clothing. Pierre Cardin wine?
            Levi’s blue jeans. Levi’s shoes?

            Colgate-Palmolive: “We want to leverage our basic
         core brands and trade on our brand names to extend
         into new categories.” Ed Fogarty, President.
            Campbell Soup Company: “Leveraging and extend-
         ing high-quality, repeat-purchase brand names is
         always preferred over launching a new name.” David
         W. Johnson, CEO.
            Del Monte: “We’re dedicated to the single brand
         concept. We’re going to keep extending the Del Monte
         name into new areas.” Ewan MacDonald, President.
            Ultra Slim-Fast: “There will be soups, pastas, salad
         dressings, soda, fruit juices and a new, thicker diet drink
         called Ultra Slim-Fast Plus.” Daniel Abraham, Chairman.
            (Good luck and good night, Mr. Abraham.)
            Why does top management believe that line exten-
         sion works, in spite of the overwhelming evidence to
         the contrary? One reason is that while line extension is
         a loser in the long term, it can be a winner in the short
         term (chapter 11: The Law of Perspective).
         Management is also blinded by an intense loyalty to
         the company or brand. Why else would PepsiCo have
         introduced Crystal Pepsi in spite of the failures of
         Pepsi Light and Pepsi AM?
            More is less. The more products, the more markets,
         the more alliances a company makes, the less money it
         makes. “Full-speed ahead in all directions” seems to

                                      73
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 74




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         be the call from the corporate bridge. When will com-
         panies learn that line extension ultimately leads to
         oblivion?
            Less is more. If you want to be successful today, you
         have to narrow the focus in order to build a position in
         the prospect’s mind.
            What does IBM stand for? It used to stand for
         “mainframe computers.” Today it stands for every-
         thing, which means it stands for nothing.
            Why is Sears, Roebuck in trouble? Because the
         company tried to be all things to all people. Sears was
         big in hard goods, so it went into soft goods and then
         fashion. The company even hired Cheryl Tiegs. (Do
         fashion models really buy their miniskirts at Sears?)
            In the conventional view, a business strategy usually
         consists of developing an all-encompassing vision. In
         other words, what concept or idea is big enough to hold
         all of a company’s products and services on the market
         today as well as those that are planned for the future?
            In the conventional view, strategy is a tent. You
         stake out a tent big enough so it can hold everything
         you might possibly want to get into.
            IBM has erected an enormous computer tent.
         Nothing in the computer field, today or in the future,
         will fall outside the IBM tent. This is a recipe for
         disaster. As new companies, new products, new
         ideas invade the computer arena, IBM is going to get
         blown away. You can’t defend a rapidly growing mar-
         ket like computers even if you are a financial power-
         house like IBM. From a strategic point of view, you

                                       74
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 75




                         THE LAW OF LINE EXTENSION



         have to be much more selective, picking and choos-
         ing the area in which to pitch your tent.
            Strategically, General Motors is in the same boat as
         IBM. GM is into anything and everything on wheels.
         Sedans, sports cars, cheap cars, expensive cars, trucks,
         minivans, even electric cars. So what is GM’s business
         strategy? If it runs on the road, or off the road, we’ll
         chase it.
            For many companies, line extension is the easy way
         out. Launching a new brand requires not only money,
         but also an idea or concept. For a new brand to suc-
         ceed, it ought to be first in a new category (chapter 1:
         The Law of Leadership). Or the new brand ought to be
         positioned as an alternative to the leader (chapter 9:
         The Law of the Opposite). Companies that wait until a
         new market has developed often find these two leader-
         ship positions already preempted. So they fall back on
         the old reliable line extension approach.
            The antidote for line extension is corporate
         courage, a commodity in short supply.




                                      75
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 76




                            13
                        The Law of
                         Sacrifice
                   You have to give up something
                     in order to get something.




                                       76
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 77




            The law of sacrifice is the opposite of the law of
         line extension. If you want to be successful today, you
         should give something up.
            There are three things to sacrifice: product line, tar-
         get market, and constant change.
            First, the product line. Where is it written that the
         more you have to sell, the more you sell?
            The full line is a luxury for a loser. If you want to
         be successful, you have to reduce your product line,
         not expand it. Take Emery Air Freight. Emery was
         in the air freight services business. Anything you
         wanted to ship you could ship via Emery. Small
         packages, large packages, overnight service,
         delayed service.
            From a marketing point of view, what did Federal
         Express do? It concentrated on one service: small
         packages overnight. Today Federal Express is a much
         bigger company than Emery.
            The power of the sacrifice for Federal Express was
         in being able to put the word overnight in the mind of
         the prospect. When it absolutely, positively had to be
         there overnight, you would call Federal Express.
            Then what did Federal Express do? The company
         did the same thing Emery did. It threw away its
         overnight position by buying Tiger International’s
         Flying Tiger cargo line for $880 million. Now
         Federal Express is a worldwide air cargo company
         without a worldwide position. In just 21 months
         Federal Express lost $1.1 billion in its international
         operations.

                                      77
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 78




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            Marketing is a game of mental warfare. It’s a battle of
         perceptions, not products or services. In the mind of the
         prospect, Federal Express is the overnight company. Federal
         Express owns the overnight position. When the market
         turned international, Federal Express faced a classic mar-
         keting dilemma. Should it try to take a domestic name into
         the international field? Or should it create a new worldwide
         name? Furthermore, how should it deal with DHL, the
         company that got into the international field first?
            It’s bad enough that Federal Express walked away
         from the “overnight” idea. What’s worse is that it did-
         n’t replace the idea with a new one.
            Eveready was the long-time leader in batteries.
         But new technology arrived—as it does in most
         industries. The first technology to change the battery
         business was the heavy-duty battery. What would you
         call your heavy-duty battery if you had the No. 1
         name in batteries? You’d probably call it the Eveready
         heavy-duty battery, which is what Eveready did.
            Then the alkaline battery arrived. Again, Eveready
         called its alkaline battery the Eveready alkaline bat-
         tery. It seemed to make sense.
            Then P.R. Mallory introduced a line of alkaline bat-
         teries only. Furthermore, the company gave the line a
         better name: Duracell.
            The power of the sacrifice for Duracell was in being
         able to put the “long-lasting battery” idea in the mind
         of the prospect. Duracell lasts twice as long as
         Eveready, said the advertising.
            Eveready was forced to change the name of its alka-

                                       78
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 79




                            THE LAW OF SACRIFICE



         line battery to “the Energizer.” But it was too late.
         Duracell had already become the leader in the battery
         market.
            The world of business is populated by big, highly
         diversified generalists and small, narrowly focused
         specialists. If line extension and diversification were
         effective marketing strategies, you’d expect to see the
         generalists riding high. But they’re not. Most of them
         are in trouble.
            The generalist is weak. Take Kraft, for example.
         Everybody thinks Kraft is a strong brand name. In jellies
         and jams, Kraft has 9 percent of the market. But Smucker’s
         has 35 percent. Kraft means everything, but with a name
         like Smucker’s, it has to be jelly or jam because that’s all
         Smucker’s makes. In mayonnaise, Kraft has 18 percent of
         the market. But Hellmann’s has 42 percent.
            (Kraft does have a leading brand in terms of market
         share. However, its name isn’t Kraft, it’s Philadelphia.
         Philadelphia brand cream cheese has 70 percent of the
         cream cheese market.)
            Take the retail industry. Which retailers are in trou-
         ble today? The department stores. And what’s a depart-
         ment store? A place that sells everything. That’s a
         recipe for disaster.
            Campeau, L.J. Hooker, and Gimbels all wound up
         in bankruptcy court. Ames department stores filed for
         bankruptcy. Hills department stores filed for bankrupt-
         cy. Macy’s, the owner of the world’s largest store, filed
         for bankruptcy.
            Interstate Department Stores also went bankrupt. So

                                      79
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 80




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         the company looked at the books and decided to focus
         on the only product it made money on: toys. As long as
         Interstate was going to focus on toys, it decided to
         change its name to Toys “R” Us. Today Toys “R” Us
         does 20 percent of the retail toy business in the coun-
         try. Very profitably, too. In its last fiscal year, Toys “R”
         Us made $326 million on sales of $5.5 billion.
            Many retail chains are successfully patterning
         themselves on the Toys “R” Us formula: a narrow
         focus with in-depth stock. Staples (office supplies)
         and Blockbuster Video are two recent examples.
            In the retail field generally, the big successes are the
         specialists:

            • The Limited. Upscale clothing for working
              women.
            • The Gap. Casual clothing for the young at heart.
            • Benetton. Wool and cotton clothing for young
              swingers.
            • Victoria’s Secret. Sexy undergarments.
            • Foot Locker. Athletic shoes.
            • Banana Republic. Safari wear.

            (When a clothing chain with a name like Banana
         Republic can be successful, you know we live in the
         age of the specialist.)
            Let’s discuss the second sacrifice, target market.
         Where is it written that you have to appeal to everybody?
            Take the cola field. Coca-Cola got into the
         prospect’s mind first and built a powerful position. In

                                       80
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 81




                            THE LAW OF SACRIFICE



         the late fifties, for example, Coke outsold Pepsi more
         than five to one. What could Pepsi-Cola do to go
         against Coke’s powerful position?
             In the early sixties Pepsi-Cola finally developed a
         strategy based on the concept of sacrifice. The compa-
         ny sacrificed everything except the teenage market.
         Then it brilliantly exploited this market by hiring its
         icons: Michael Jackson, Lionel Richie, Don Johnson.
             Within one generation, Pepsi closed the gap. Today it is
         only 10 percent behind Coca-Cola in total U.S. cola sales. (In
         the supermarket, Pepsi-Cola actually outsells Coca-Cola.)
             In spite of Pepsi-Cola’s success, however, the pres-
         sure for enlarging the tent is always present. Recently
         it succumbed to temptation. According to Advertising
         Age, “Pepsi-Cola Co. has outgrown the Pepsi genera-
         tion. In a major marketing shift, flagship Pepsi will be
         pitched as the soft drink for the masses.”
             “Gotta have it” is Pepsi’s new theme. The advertis-
         ing shows older people like Yogi Berra and Regis
         Philbin drinking Pepsi.
             “The one drawback of Pepsi advertising in the past
         has been a little too much focus on youth,” says Phil
         Dusenberry of Pepsi’s ad agency BBDO. “We could
         have made greater gains had we expanded our hori-
         zons to cast a wider net and catch more people.”
             According to Fortune magazine, Coca-Cola is the
         world’s most powerful trademark. When an also-ran
         like Pepsi-Cola develops a narrowly focused strategy
         that puts it within an eyelash of the leader, why would
         it change its powerful strategy?

                                      81
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 82




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            Why indeed! There seems to be an almost religious
         belief that the wider net catches more customers, in
         spite of many examples to the contrary.
            Take Budweiser, for example. “When we go out to
         develop a plan for Budweiser, we have to cover every-
         body above 21 years of age, whether they’re male,
         female, black, white,” says August Busch IV.
            Look at cigarette advertisements, especially old cig-
         arette ads. They invariably show both a man and a
         woman. Why? In an age when most smokers were
         men, cigarette manufacturers wanted to broaden their
         market. We got the men, let’s go out and get the
         women, too.
            So what did Philip Morris do? It narrowed the focus
         to men only. And then it narrowed the focus even more
         to a man’s man, the cowboy. The brand was called
         Marlboro. Today, Marlboro is the largest-selling ciga-
         rette in the world. In the United States, Marlboro is the
         largest-selling cigarette among men and women.
            The target is not the market. That is, the apparent
         target of your marketing is not the same as the people
         who will actually buy your product. Even though
         Pepsi-Cola’s target was the teenager, the market was
         everybody. The 50-year-old guy who wants to think
         he’s 29 will drink the Pepsi.
            The target of Marlboro advertising is the cowboy,
         but the market is everybody. Do you know how many
         cowboys are left in America? Very few. (They’ve all
         been smoking Marlboros.)
            Finally, the third sacrifice: constant change. Where

                                       82
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 83




                            THE LAW OF SACRIFICE



         is it written that you have to change your strategy
         every year at budget review time?
             If you try to follow the twists and turns of the mar-
         ket, you are bound to wind up off the road. The best
         way to maintain a consistent position is not to change
         it in the first place.
             People Express had a brilliant “narrow” position to
         start with. It was the no-frills airline that flew to no-
         frills cities at no-frills prices. People used to get on a
         People Express plane and say, “Where are we going?”
         They didn’t care, as long as it was cheap enough.
             What did People Express do after it became suc-
         cessful? It tried to be all things to all people. It invest-
         ed in new equipment, like 747s. It started to fly the
         heavily traveled routes to places like Chicago and
         Denver, not to mention Europe. It bought Frontier
         Airlines. It added frills, like first-class sections.
             People Express promptly lost altitude and only
         escaped bankruptcy court by selling itself to Texas Air,
         which did it for them.
             White Castle, on the other hand, has never changed
         its position. A White Castle today not only looks the
         same as a White Castle did 60 years ago, it also sells
         the same “frozen sliders” at unbelievably low prices.
         Would you believe the average White Castle does
         more than $1 million a year in revenues? (That’s more
         than Burger King and not too far behind McDonald’s.)
             Good things come to those who sacrifice.



                                      83
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 84




                            14
                        The Law of
                        Attributes
                   For every attribute, there is an
                    opposite, effective attribute.




                                       84
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 85




             In chapter 6 (The Law of Exclusivity) we made the
         point that you can’t own the same word or position that
         your competitor owns. You must find your own word
         to own. You must seek out another attribute.
             Too often a company attempts to emulate the leader.
         “They must know what works,” goes the rationale, “so
         let’s do something similar.” Not good thinking.
             It’s much better to search for an opposite attribute
         that will allow you to play off against the leader. The
         key word here is opposite—similar won’t do.
             Coca-Cola was the original and thus the choice of
         older people. Pepsi successfully positioned itself as the
         choice of the younger generation.
             Since Crest owned cavities, other toothpastes avoid-
         ed cavities and jumped on other attributes like taste,
         whitening, breath protection, and, more recently, bak-
         ing soda.
             Marketing is a battle of ideas. So if you are to suc-
         ceed, you must have an idea or attribute of your own to
         focus your efforts around. Without one, you had better
         have a low price. A very low price.
             Some say all attributes are not created equal.
         Some attributes are more important to customers
         than others. You must try and own the most impor-
         tant attribute.
             Cavity prevention is the most important attribute
         in toothpaste. It’s the one to own. But the law of
         exclusivity points to the simple truth that once an
         attribute is successfully taken by your competition,
         it’s gone. You must move on to a lesser attribute and

                                      85
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 86




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         live with a smaller share of the category. Your job is
         to seize a different attribute, dramatize the value of
         your attribute, and thus increase your share.
             For many years IBM dominated the world of com-
         puters with its attributes of “big” and “powerful.”
         Companies that tried to move in on those attributes had
         little success. RCA, GE, UNIVAC, Burroughs,
         Honeywell, NCR, and Control Data lost a lot of money
         on mainframe computers. Then an upstart from Boston
         went for the attribute of “small” and the minicomputer
         was born. They probably laughed in Armonk because
         they knew corporate America wanted “big and power-
         ful.” Today “small” has grown to such proportions that
         IBM’s vast mainframe empire is in serious trouble.
             A company that never laughs at new attributes that
         are exactly the opposite of their current products is
         Gillette, the world’s No.1 razor blade maker. Its domi-
         nance revolves around its high-technology razors and
         cartridge systems. When an upstart from France
         brought an opposite attribute to the category in the
         form of a “disposable” razor, Gillette could have
         laughed and wheeled out its research on how America
         wants hefty, expensive, high-technology razors. But it
         didn’t.
             Instead, Gillette jumped in with a disposable razor
         of its own, called Good News. By spending heavily,
         Gillette was able to win the battle of the disposables.
             Today the Gillette Good News razor dominates the
         disposable category, which has grown to dominate
         the razor blade business. Moral: You can’t predict the

                                       86
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 87




                           THE LAW OF ATTRIBUTES



         size of a new attribute’s share, so never laugh.
            Burger King was unsuccessful when it tried to take
         the attribute “fast” from McDonald’s. What should
         Burger King have done? Use the opposite attribute?
         The exact opposite attribute, “slow,” won’t do for a
         fast-food place (although there is an element of slow-
         ness in Burger King’s “broiling” concept).
            A single trip to any McDonald’s should be enough to
         find another attribute that McDonald’s owns: “kids.”
         This is indeed the place to which kids drag their par-
         ents, and McDonald’s has the swing sets to prove it.
         This sets up an opportunity vividly demonstrated by the
         Coke and Pepsi battle. If McDonald’s owns kids, then
         Burger King has the opportunity to position itself for
         the older crowd, which includes any kid who doesn’t
         want to be perceived as a kid. That generally works out
         to be everyone over the age of 10 (not a bad market).
            To make the concept work, Burger King would have
         to invoke the law of sacrifice and give all the little kids
         to McDonald’s. While this might mean getting rid of a
         few swing sets, it also allows Burger King to hang
         “kiddieland” on McDonald’s (chapter 9: The Law of
         the Opposite).
            To drive the concept into prospects’ minds, Burger
         King would need a term. It could be grow up. Grow up
         to the flame-broiled taste of Burger King.
            The new concept for Burger King would strike fear
         and terror in the boardroom at McDonald’s, always a
         good sign of an effective program.


                                      87
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 88




                            15
                        The Law of
                         Candor
                    When you admit a negative,
                the prospect will give you a positive.




                                       88
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 89




          It goes against corporate and human nature to admit a
       problem. For years, the power of positive thinking has been
       drummed into us. “Think positive” has been the subject of
       endless books and articles.
          So it may come as a surprise to you that one of the most
       effective ways to get into a prospect’s mind is to first admit
       a negative and then twist it into a positive.
          “Avis is only No. 2 in rent-a-cars.”
          “With a name like Smucker’s, it has to be good.”
          “The 1970 VW will stay ugly longer.”
          “Joy. The most expensive perfume in the world.”
          What’s going on here? Why does a dose of honesty work
       so well in the marketing process?
          First and foremost, candor is very disarming. Every
       negative statement you make about yourself is instantly
       accepted as truth. Positive statements, on the other hand,
       are looked at as dubious at best. Especially in an advertise-
       ment.
          You have to prove a positive statement to the
       prospect’s satisfaction. No proof is needed for a negative
       statement.
          “The 1970 VW will stay ugly longer.” A car that ugly
       must be reliable, thinks the prospect.
          “Joy. The most expensive perfume in the world.” If peo-
       ple are willing to pay $375 an ounce, it must be a sensa-
       tional perfume.
          “With a name like Smucker’s, it has to be good.”
       Most companies, especially family companies, would
       never make fun of their own name. Yet the Smucker
       family did, which is one reason why Smucker’s is the

                                      89
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 90




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



       No.1 brand of jams and jellies. If your name is bad, you
       have two choices: change the name or make fun of it.
       The one thing you can’t do is to ignore a bad name.
       Which is one reason why you won’t find beer brands
       like Gablinger’s, Grolsch, and Gresedieck in your
       supermarket today.
           “Avis is only No. 2 in rent-a-cars.” So why go with
       them? They must try harder. Everybody knew that Avis
       was second in rent-a-cars.
           So why go with the obvious? Marketing is often a
       search for the obvious. Since you can’t change a mind once
       it’s made up, your marketing efforts have to be devoted to
       using ideas and concepts already installed in the brain. You
       have to use your marketing programs to “rub it in.” No pro-
       gram did this as brilliantly as the Avis No. 2 program.
           Positive thinking has been highly overrated. The explo-
       sive growth of communications in our society has made
       people defensive and cautious about companies trying to
       sell them anything. Admitting a problem is something that
       very few companies do.
           When a company starts a message by admitting a prob-
       lem, people tend to, almost instinctively, open their minds.
       Think about the times that someone came to you with a
       problem and how quickly you got involved and wanted to
       help. Now think about people starting off a conversation
       about some wonderful things they are doing. You probably
       were a lot less interested.
           Now with that mind open, you’re in a position to
       drive in the positive, which is your selling idea. Some
       years ago, Scope entered the mouthwash market with a

                                       90
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 91




                             THE LAW OF CANDOR



       “good-tasting” mouthwash, thus exploiting Listerine’s
       truly terrible taste.
           What should Listerine do? It certainly couldn’t tell peo-
       ple that Listerine’s taste “wasn’t all that bad.” That would
       raise a red flag that would reinforce a negative perception.
       Things could get worse. Instead, Listerine brilliantly
       invoked the law of candor: “The taste you hate twice a
       day.”
           Not only did the company admit the product tasted bad,
       it admitted that people actually hated it. (Now that’s hon-
       esty.) This set up the selling idea that Listerine “kills a lot
       of germs.”
           The prospect figured that anything that tastes like disin-
       fectant must indeed be a germ killer. A crisis passed with
       the help of a heavy dose of candor.
           As another example, General Foods admitted that
       Grape-Nuts cereal was a “learned pleasure” and advised
       consumers to “try it for a week.” Sales went up 23 percent.
           One final note: The law of candor must be used careful-
       ly and with great skill. First, your “negative” must be wide-
       ly perceived as a negative. It has to trigger an instant agree-
       ment with your prospect’s mind. If the negative doesn’t
       register quickly, your prospect will be confused and will
       wonder, “What’s this all about?”
           Next, you have to shift quickly to the positive. The pur-
       pose of candor isn’t to apologize. The purpose of candor is
       to set up a benefit that will convince your prospect.
           This law only proves the old maxim: Honesty is the best
       policy.


                                      91
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 92




                            16
                        The Law of
                        Singularity
                  In each situation, only one move
                  will produce substantial results.




                                       92
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 93




             Many marketing people see success as the sum total
         of a lot of small efforts beautifully executed.
             They think they can pick and choose from a number
         of different strategies and still be successful as long as
         they put enough effort into the program. If they work
         for the leader in the category, they fritter away their
         resources on a number of different programs. They
         seem to think that the best way to grow is the puppy
         approach—get into everything.
             If they’re not with the leader, they often end up try-
         ing to do the same as the leader, but a little better. It’s
         like Saddam Hussein saying that all we have to do is
         fight a little harder and everything will work out.
         Trying harder is not the secret of marketing success.
             Whether you try hard or try easy, the differences are
         marginal. Furthermore, the bigger the company, the more
         the law of averages wipes out any real advantage of a try-
         ing-harder approach.
             History teaches that the only thing that works in
         marketing is the single, bold stroke. Furthermore, in
         any given situation there is only one move that will
         produce substantial results.
             Successful generals study the battleground and look for that
         one bold stroke that is least expected by the enemy. Finding one
         is difficult. Finding more than one is usually impossible.
             Military strategist and author B.H. Liddell Hart
         calls this bold stroke “the line of, least expectation.”
         The Allied invasion came at Normandy, a place whose
         tide and rocky shore the Germans felt would be an
         unlikely choice for a landing of any scale.

                                       93
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 94




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            So it is in marketing. Most often there is only one
         place where a competitor is vulnerable. And that place
         should be the focus of the entire invading force.
            The automobile industry is an interesting case in
         point. For years, the leader’s main strength was in the
         middle of the line. With brands like Chevrolet,
         Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, and Cadillac, General
         Motors easily beat back frontal assaults by Ford,
         Chrysler, and American Motors. (The Edsel fiasco is a
         typical example.) GM’s dominance became legendary.
            What works in marketing is the same as what works
         in the military: the unexpected.
            Hannibal came over the Alps, a route deemed impos-
         sible to scale. Hitler came around the Maginot Line and
         sent his panzer divisions through the Ardennes, terrain
         the French generals thought impossible to traverse with
         tanks. (As a matter of fact, he did it twice—once in the
         Battle of France and again in the Battle of the Bulge.)
            In recent years there have been only two strong
         moves made against GM. Both were flanking moves
         around the GM Maginot Line. The Japanese came at
         the low end with small cars like Toyota, Datsun, and
         Honda. The Germans came at the high end with super-
         premium cars like Mercedes and BMW.
            With the success of Japanese and German flanking
         attacks, General Motors was under pressure to commit
         resources in an attempt to shore up the bottom and the
         top of its lines. (Cadillacs were too cheap to block the
         high-priced German imports.)
            In an effort to save money and maintain profits,

                                       94
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 95




                           THE LAW OF SINGULARITY



         GM made the fateful decision to build many of its
         midrange cars using the same body style. Suddenly,
         no one could tell a Chevrolet from a Pontiac or an
         Oldsmobile or a Buick. They all looked alike.
            Its look-alike cars weakened General Motors in the
         middle and opened up a move for Ford as it broke
         through with the European-styled Taurus and Sable.
         And then the Japanese jumped in with Acura, Lexus,
         and Infiniti. Now General Motors is weak across the
         board.
            Look at Coke. At present, Coca-Cola is fighting a
         two-front battle with Classic and New Coke. While
         Coca-Cola Classic has regained a lot of its original
         strength, New Coke (an Edsel from Atlanta) is barely
         hanging on.
            We’ve seen endless slogans for Coca-Cola: “We
         have a taste for you.” “The real choice.” “Catch the
         Wave.” “Red, white, and you.” “You can’t beat the feel-
         ing.” And now, “You can’t beat the real thing.” Nothing
         has moved the needle very much.
            The folks at Coca-Cola keep trying. They’ve even
         hired a Hollywood talent agency to contribute creative
         ideas.
            Any day now, the new shooters will parade into an
         Atlanta conference room and paper the wall with a
         new set of slogans. Top Coke management will then sit
         around and discuss the latest batch of creative moves.
         While it’s theoretically possible to stumble across the
         right idea if you haphazardly generate all the ideas you
         can possibly think of, it’s not an efficient way to work.

                                      95
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 96




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



            Coke needs to make progress beyond just buying
         business. As we see it, Coke has only one two-part
         move to make—one part is a step backward, the other
         is a step forward.
            First of all, Coke has to bite the bullet and drop New
         Coke. Not because it’s a loser or an embarrassment, but
         because the existence of New Coke blocks the compa-
         ny from effectively using the only weapon it has.
            With New Coke safely tucked away in the archives,
         Coke would be able to invoke the law of focus and
         bring back the concept of the “Real Thing” and use it
         against Pepsi.
            To pull the trigger, Coke could go on television and
         say to the Pepsi Generation, “All right kids, we’re not
         going to push you. When you’re ready for the Real
         Thing, we’ve got it for you.” That would be the begin-
         ning of the end of the Pepsi Generation (if Pepsi-Cola
         hadn’t already killed it off all by itself).
            Not only is this idea simple and powerful, but it’s
         really the only move available to Coke. It exploits the
         only words that Coke owns in the minds of its
         prospects: The Real Thing.
            To find that singular idea or concept, marketing
         managers have to know what’s happening in the mar-
         ketplace. They have to be down at the front in the mud
         of the battle. They have to know what’s working and
         what isn’t. They have to be involved.
            Because of the high cost of mistakes, management
         can’t afford to delegate important marketing deci-
         sions. That’s what happened at General Motors.

                                       96
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 97




                           THE LAW OF SINGULARITY



         When the financial people took over, the marketing
         programs collapsed. Their interest was in the num-
         bers, not the brands. The irony is that the numbers
         went south, along with the brands.
            It’s hard to find that single move if you’re hanging
         around headquarters and not involved in the process.




                                      97
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 98




                      17
                  The Law of
                Unpredictability
            Unless you write your competitor’s plans,
                  you can’t predict the future.




                                       98
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 99




            Implicit in most marketing plans is an assumption
         about the future. Yet marketing plans based on what
         will happen in the future are usually wrong.
            With hundreds of computers and an army of meteo-
         rologists, no one can predict the weather three days in
         advance, so how do you expect to predict your market
         three years in advance?
            IBM developed a massive marketing plan to hook
         up all PCs to its mainframes. The company called it
         OfficeVision. Yet the plan is dead in the water thanks
         to developments at Sun Microsystems, Microsoft, and
         other companies. You might say that OfficeVision
         foresaw everything but the competition.
            Failure to forecast competitive reaction is a major
         reason for marketing failures. When Pickett was asked
         which Confederate leader was responsible for the
         defeat at Gettysburg, he replied, “I’ve always thought
         the Yankees had something to do with it.”
            Yet there are those who would say that America’s
         big problem is the lack of the long view, that
         American management is too short term in its think-
         ing. Won’t eliminating long-term plans make things
         even worse?
            On the surface those concerns are real. But it’s
         important to understand what is meant by long term
         versus short term. Most of corporate America’s prob-
         lems are not related to short-term marketing thinking.
         The problem is short-term financial thinking.
            Most companies live from quarterly report to quar-
         terly report. That’s a recipe for problems. Companies

                                      99
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 100




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         that live by the numbers, die by the numbers. Harold
         Geneen of ITT fame is one man in recent times who
         best exemplifies this approach. He would wheel and
         deal and beat up his managers for ever-increasing
         earnings.
            Geneen’s efforts resulted in a house of cards that
         eventually fell apart. Today ITT is a shell of what it
         once was. Good accounting, bad marketing.
            General Motors was doing fine until the financial
         folks took over and put the focus on the numbers
         instead of the brands. They allowed Alfred P. Sloan’s
         plan of differentiated brands to fall apart. Every divi-
         sion head, in order to make their short-term numbers,
         started to chase the middle of the market.
            Good short-term planning is coming up with that
         angle or word that differentiates your product or com-
         pany. Then you set up a coherent long-term marketing
         direction that builds a program to maximize that idea
         or angle. It’s not a long-term plan, it’s a long-term
         direction.
            Tom Monaghan’s short-term angle at Domino’s Pizza
         was to come up with that “home delivery” idea and
         build a system that delivered pizzas quickly and effi-
         ciently. His long-term direction was to build the first
         nationwide home delivery chain as rapidly as possible.
            Monaghan couldn’t own the words home delivery
         until he had enough franchisees to afford national
         advertising. He accomplished both objectives, and
         today Domino’s is a $2.65 billion company with a 4
         percent share of the home delivery business.

                                      100
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 101




                       THE LAW OF UNPREDICTABILITY



         Monaghan did it all without a complex, 10-year plan.
            So what can you do? How can you best cope with
         unpredictability? While you can’t predict the future,
         you can get a handle on trends, which is a way to take
         advantage of change. One example of a trend is
         America’s growing orientation toward good health.
         This trend has opened the door for a number of new
         products, especially healthier foods. The recent run-
         away success of Healthy Choice frozen entrées is a
         clear example of a product that took advantage of this
         long-term trend.
            ConAgra introduced Healthy Choice in March 1989.
         Years earlier, however, there were plenty of low-sodium,
         low-fat, light brands on the market. But these healthy
         ideas were buried under line extension names. ConAgra
         was the first to use a simple name and concept to take
         advantage of a trend that has been going on for years.
            Unfortunately, ConAgra is well on its way to con-
         fusing things with a wide array of Healthy Choice line
         extensions that go way beyond entrées. It is violating
         the law of sacrifice.
            The danger in working with trends is extrapolation.
         Many companies jump to conclusions about how far a
         trend will go. If you believed the prognosticators of a
         few years ago, everyone today is eating broiled fish or
         mesquite-barbecued chicken. (Hamburger sales are
         doing just fine, thank you.)
            Equally as bad as extrapolating a trend is the com-
         mon practice of assuming the future will be a replay of
         the present. When you assume that nothing will change,

                                      101
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 102




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         you are predicting the future just as surely as when you
         assume that something will change. Remember Peter’s
         Law: The unexpected always happens.
            While tracking trends can be a useful tool in dealing
         with the unpredictable future, market research can be more
         of a problem than a help. Research does best at measuring
         the past. New ideas and concepts are almost impossible to
         measure. No one has a frame of reference. People don’t
         know what they will do until they face an actual decision.
            The classic example is the research conducted
         before Xerox introduced the plain-paper copier. What
         came back was the conclusion that no one would pay
         five cents for a plain-paper copy when they could get
         a Thermofax copy for a cent and a half.
            Xerox ignored the research, and the rest is history.
            One way to cope with an unpredictable world is to
         build an enormous amount of flexibility into your
         organization. As change comes sweeping through your
         category, you have to be willing to change and change
         quickly if you are to survive in the long term.
            Yesterday, General Motors was slow to react to the
         small-car trend. It has cost the company dearly.
            Today, IBM is slow to acknowledge the trend away
         from mainframes. It could cost the company dearly.
            At present, the workstation is a real threat to both
         mainframes and minicomputers. It offers enormous
         power at very low cost. If IBM is going to protect its
         computer leadership, the company must become a
         serious player in a category dominated by Sun
         Microsystems and Hewlett-Packard.

                                      102
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 103




                       THE LAW OF UNPREDICTABILITY



            A natural move would be to introduce a new gener-
         ic. IBM’s best opportunity might be to name its new
         line of high-powered workstations “PMs,” just as it did
         with its very successful “PCs.” “PM” could stand for
         “personal mainframe.” These two generic words dra-
         matically capture the speed and power of these new
         desktop machines. They are also words that IBM owns
         in the mind. The combination would be very powerful.
            The only problem with a concept like this probably
         lies inside IBM itself. The term personal mainframe
         would strike terror in IBM’s mainframe division as
         well as in its personal computer division. We suggest
         that the phones would ring and the case would quickly
         be made that a “personal mainframe” would under-
         mine these two important sources of income.
            It’s probably true that a personal mainframe product
         would undermine IBM’s two other main sources of
         revenue, but a company must be flexible enough to
         attack itself with a new idea. Change isn’t easy, but it’s
         the only way to cope with an unpredictable future.
            One final note that’s worth mentioning: There’s a
         difference between “predicting” the future and “taking
         a chance” on the future. Orville Redenbacher’s
         Gourmet Popping Corn took a chance that people
         would pay twice as much for a high-end popcorn. Not
         a bad risk in today’s affluent society.
            No one can predict the future with any degree of
         certainty. Nor should marketing plans try to.



                                      103
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 104




                            18
                        The Law of
                         Success
                  Success often leads to arrogance
                     and arrogance to failure.




                                      104
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 105




            Ego is the enemy of successful marketing.
            Objectivity is what’s needed.
            When people become successful, they tend to
         become less objective. They often substitute their own
         judgment for what the market wants.
            Donald Trump and Robert Maxwell are two exam-
         ples of people blinded by early success and untainted
         by humility. And when you’re blind, it is indeed hard to
         focus.
            Mr. Trump’s strategy was to put his name on every-
         thing, committing the cardinal sin of line extension.
         (Denial seems to go hand in hand with a big ego.
         When we first met The Donald, his opening remarks
         were about how people accuse him of having a big
         ego. He went on to state that it was totally untrue, he
         did not have a big ego. All the while, it was hard to
         avoid noticing a three-foot-high brass “T” sitting on
         the floor next to his desk. So much for the sermon.)
            Success is often the fatal element behind the rash of
         line extensions. When a brand is successful, the com-
         pany assumes the name is the primary reason for the
         brand’s success. So they promptly look for other prod-
         ucts to plaster the name on.
            Actually it’s the opposite. The name didn’t make the
         brand famous (although a bad name might keep the
         brand from becoming famous). The brand got famous
         because you made the right marketing moves. In other
         words, the steps you took were in tune with the funda-
         mental laws of marketing.
            You got into the mind first. You narrowed the

                                      105
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 106




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         focus. You preempted a powerful attribute.
            Your success puffs up your ego to such an extent
         that you put the famous name on other products.
         Result: early success and long-term failure as illustrat-
         ed by the failure of Donald Trump.
            The more you identify with your brand or corporate
         name, the more likely you are to fall into the line
         extension trap. “It can’t be the name,” you might be
         thinking when things go wrong. “We have a great
         name.” Pride goeth before destruction and a haughty
         spirit before a fall. Proverbs16:18.
            Tom Monaghan of Domino’s Pizza is one of the few
         executives who have recognized how ego can lead you
         astray. “You start thinking you can do anything. I was that
         way back in the early days. I got into frozen pizzas for a
         while and that was a disaster. If I hadn’t messed around
         with those frozen pizzas for the better part of a year, try-
         ing to sell them in bars and restaurants, Domino’s proba-
         bly would have a lot more stores by now.”
            Actually, ego is helpful. It can be an effective driv-
         ing force in building a business. What hurts is inject-
         ing your ego in the marketing process. Brilliant mar-
         keters have the ability to think like a prospect thinks.
         They put themselves in the shoes of their customers.
         They don’t impose their own view of the world on the
         situation. (Keep in mind that the world is all percep-
         tion anyway, and the only thing that counts in market-
         ing is the customer’s perception.)
            As their successes mounted, companies like
         General Motors, Sears, Roebuck, and IBM became

                                      106
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 107




                             THE LAW OF SUCCESS



         arrogant. They felt they could do anything they want-
         ed to in the marketplace. Success leads to failure.
            Consider Digital Equipment Corporation, the com-
         pany that brought us the minicomputer. Starting from
         scratch, DEC became an enormously successful $14
         billion company.
            DEC’s founder is Kenneth Olsen. His success made
         Ken such a believer in his own view of the computer
         world that he pooh-poohed the personal computer,
         then open systems, and, finally, reduced instruction set
         computing (RISC). In other words, Ken Olsen ignored
         three of the biggest developments in the computer cat-
         egory. (A trend is like the tide—you don’t fight it.)
         Today Ken Olsen is out.
            The bigger the company, the more likely it is that
         the chief executive has lost touch with the front lines.
         This might be the single most important factor limit-
         ing the growth of a corporation. All other factors favor
         size. Marketing is war, and the first principle of war-
         fare is the principle of force. The larger army, the larg-
         er company, has the advantage.
            But the larger company gives up some of that advan-
         tage if it cannot keep itself focused on the marketing
         battle that takes place in the mind of the customer.
            The shootout at General Motors between Roger
         Smith and Ross Perot illustrates the point. When he
         was on the GM board, Ross Perot spent his weekends
         visiting dealers and buying cars. He was critical of
         Roger Smith for not doing the same.
            “We’ve got to nuke the GM system,” Perot said. He

                                      107
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 108




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         advocated atom-bombing the heated garages, chauf-
         feur-driven limousines, executive dining rooms.
         (Chauffeur-driven limousines for a company trying to
         sell cars?)
            If you’re a busy CEO, how do you gather objective
         information on what is really happening? How do you
         get around the propensity of middle management to
         tell you what they think you want to hear?
            How do you get the bad news as well as the good?
            One possibility is to go “in disguise” or unan-
         nounced. This is especially useful at the distributor or
         retailer level. In many ways this is analogous to the
         king who dresses up as a commoner and mingles with
         his subjects. Reason: to get honest opinions of what’s
         happening.
            Like kings, chief executives rarely get honest opin-
         ions from their ministers. There’s too much intrigue
         going on at the court.
            Another aspect of the problem is the allocation of
         time. Quite often the CEO’S time is taken up with too
         many United Way meetings, too many industry activi-
         ties, too many outside board meetings, too many testi-
         monial dinners.
            According to one survey, the average CEO spends
         18 hours a week on “outside activities.” The next
         time-waster is internal meetings. The average CEO
         spends 17 hours a week attending corporate meetings
         and 6 hours a week preparing for those meetings.
         Since the typical top executive works 61 hours a
         week, that leaves only 20 hours for everything else,

                                      108
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 109




                             THE LAW OF SUCCESS



         including managing the operation and going down to
         the front. No wonder chief executives delegate the
         marketing function. That’s a mistake.
            Marketing is too important to be turned over to an
         underling. If you delegate anything, you should dele-
         gate the chairmanship of the next fund-raising drive.
         (The vice president of the United States, not the pres-
         ident, attends the state funerals.) The next thing to cut
         back on are the meetings. Instead of talking things
         over, walk out and see for yourself. As Gorbachev told
         Reagan, “It is better to see once than to hear a hundred
         times.”
            Small companies are mentally closer to the front
         than big companies. That might be one reason they
         grew more rapidly in the last decade. They haven’t
         been tainted by the law of success.




                                      109
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 110




                            19
                        The Law of
                         Failure
                        Failure is to be expected
                             and accepted.




                                      110
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 111




             Too many companies try to fix things rather than
         drop things. “Let’s reorganize to save the situation” is
         their way of life.
             Admitting a mistake and not doing anything about
         it is bad for your career. A better strategy is to recog-
         nize failure early and cut your losses. American
         Motors should have abandoned passenger cars and
         focused on Jeep. IBM should have dropped copiers
         and Xerox should have dropped computers years
         before they finally recognized their mistakes.
             The Japanese seem to be able to admit a mistake early
         and then make the necessary changes. Their consensus
         management style tends to eliminate the ego. Since a
         large number of people have a small piece of a big deci-
         sion, there is no stigma that can be considered career
         damaging. In other words, it’s a lot easer to live with “We
         were all wrong” than the devastating “I was wrong.”
             This egoless approach is a major factor in making
         the Japanese such relentless marketers. It’s not that
         they don’t make mistakes, but when they do, they
         admit them, fix them, and just keep coming.
             The hugely successful Wal-Mart has another
         approach that enables the company to deal with fail-
         ure. It’s called Sam Walton’s “ready, fire, aim”
         approach. It’s an outgrowth of his penchant for con-
         stant tinkering.
             Walton was well aware that nobody hits the target
         every time. But at Wal-Mart, people aren’t punished if
         their experiments fail. As Wal-Mart’s chief executive
         said in a Business Week article, “If you learn some-

                                      111
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 112




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         thing and you’re trying something, then you probably
         get credit for it. But woe to the person who makes the
         same mistake twice.”
            Wal-Mart is different from many large corporations
         because, so far, it appears to be free of an insidious
         disease called the “personal agenda” that can creep
         into any corporation. Marketing decisions are often
         made first with the decision maker’s career in mind
         and second with the impact on the competition or the
         enemy in mind. There is a built-in conflict between the
         personal and the corporate agenda.
            This leads to a failure to take risks. (It’s hard to be
         first in a new category without sticking your neck out.)
         When the senior executive has a high salary and a short
         time to retirement, a bold move is highly unlikely.
            Even junior executives often make “safe” decisions
         so as to not disrupt their progress up the corporate lad-
         der. Nobody has ever been fired for a bold move they
         didn’t make.
            In some American companies nothing gets done
         unless it benefits the personal agenda of someone in
         top management. This severely limits the potential
         marketing moves a company can make. An idea gets
         rejected not because it isn’t fundamentally sound but
         because no one in top management will personally
         benefit from its success.
            One way to defuse the personal agenda factor is to
         bring it out in the open. 3M uses the “champion” sys-
         tem to publicly identify the person who will benefit
         from the success of a new product or venture. The

                                      112
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 113




                             THE LAW OF FAILURE



         successful introduction of 3M’s Post-it Notes illus-
         trates how the concept works. Art Fry is the 3M scien-
         tist who championed the Post-it Notes product, which
         took almost a dozen years to bring to market.
             While the 3M system works, in theory the ideal
         environment would allow managers to judge a concept
         on its merits, not on whom the concept would benefit.’
             If a company is going to operate in an ideal way, it
         will take teamwork, esprit de corps, and a self-sacri-
         ficing leader. One immediately thinks of Patton and
         his Third Army and its dash across France. No army in
         history took as much territory and as many prisoners
         in as short a period of time.
             Patton’s reward? Eisenhower fired him.




                                      113
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 114




                            20
                        The Law of
                          Hype
                 The situation is often the opposite
                 of the way it appears in the press.




                                      114
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 115




             When IBM was successful, the company said very
         little. Now it throws a lot of press conferences.
             When things are going well, a company doesn’t
         need the hype. When you need the hype, it usually
         means you’re in trouble.
             Young and inexperienced reporters and editors tend
         to be more impressed by what they read in other pub-
         lications than by what they gather themselves. Once
         the hype starts, it often continues on and on.
             No soft drink has received more hype than New
         Coke. By one estimate, New Coke received more than
         $1 billion worth of free publicity. Add to that the hun-
         dreds of millions of dollars spent to launch the brand,
         and New Coke should have been the world’s most suc-
         cessful product. It didn’t happen.
             Less than 60 days after the launch, Coca-Cola was
         forced to come back with the original formula, now
         called Coca-Cola Classic. Today Classic outsells New
         about 15 to 1.
             No newspaper has received more hype than USA
         Today. At its launch in 1982 were the president of
         the United States, the speaker of the House of
         Representatives, and the majority leader of the U.S.
         Senate. The residue of this initial hype is still so
         great that most people cannot believe USA Today is
         a loser.
             No computer has received more hype than the
         NeXt computer. Demand for press conference cre-
         dentials was so great that Steve Jobs had to print
         tickets in advance, even though the auditorium

                                      115
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 116




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         could hold several thousand people. All the seats
         were filled.
            Steve Jobs makes television news as well as the
         cover of many major publications. IBM, Ross Perot,
         and Canon have invested $130 million.
            Will NeXt be a winner? Of course not. Where is the
         opening? NeXt is the first in a new category of what?
            History is filled with marketing failures that were suc-
         cessful in the press. The Tucker 48, the U.S. Football
         League, Videotext, the automated factory, the personal hel-
         icopter, the manufactured home, the picturephone, poly-
         ester suits. The essence of the hype was not just that the
         new product was going to be successful. The essence of the
         hype was that existing products would now be obsolete.
            Polyester was going to make wool obsolete.
         Videotext was going to make newspapers obsolete.
         The personal helicopter was going to make the roads
         and highways obsolete. The Tucker 48 with its
         “cyclop’s eye” headlight would revolutionize the way
         Detroit makes automobiles. (Only 51 were ever built.)
            In the heavily touted “office of the future,” every-
         thing was going to be integrated into one ball of com-
         puter wax. The last time we looked, there were sepa-
         rate typewriters (now called personal computers), sep-
         arate laser printers, separate fax machines, separate
         copy machines, separate postal meters. The office of
         the future is aptly named—a concept that will remain
         forever in the future.
            These predictions violate the law of unpredictability.
         No one can predict the future, not even a sophisticated

                                      116
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02    12:23 PM   Page 117




                                  THE LAW OF HYPE



         reporter for the Wall Street Journal. The only revolutions
         you can predict are the ones that have already started.
            Did anyone predict the overthrow of communism
         and the Soviet Union? Not really. It was only after the
         process had started that the press jumped on the
         “crumbling communist empire” story.
            Contrast the first Tucker with the first Toyopet that
         hit the shores of California. Did the Los Angeles Times
         do a story on how Japanese imports were going to
         shake up the auto industry? Not at all. The only stories
         that made the news were about the little cars from
         Japan that fell apart because they weren’t up to the rig-
         ors of American roads. (Toyopet, of course, went on to
         become a big winner after changing the cars and
         changing the car’s name to Toyota.)
            When MCI got started by launching a microwave
         service between Chicago and St. Louis, did the press
         say, “Watch out, AT&T, here comes the competition?”
         No, they pretty much ignored little MCI. When Sun
         Microsystems shipped its first workstation, did the
         press note the significance of the event, that someday
         workstations would rattle the cages at IBM and DEC?
         No, the press ignored Sun.
            Forget the front page. If you’re looking for clues to
         the future, look in the back of the paper for those
         innocuous little stories.
            Neither the personal computer nor the facsimile
         machine took off like a rocket. The personal com-
         puter was introduced in 1974. It took six years for
         IBM to strike back with the PC. Even the PC didn’t

                                       117
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 118




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         boom until a year and a half later, when Lotus 1-2-
         3 hit the market.
             Capturing the imagination of the public is not the
         same as revolutionizing a market. Take the picture-
         phone, now called the videophone. Ever since its intro-
         duction at the 1964 New York World’s Fair, the picture-
         phone has been in the news, usually on the front page.
         The latest example is a front-page story in the Wall
         Street Journal, “The Videophone Era May Finally Be
         Near, Bringing Big Changes.”
             This is the third try for AT&T. In the seventies, it
         failed with the picturephone at $100 a month. In the
         eighties, it failed with a picturephone meeting service
         at $2,300 an hour. In the nineties, AT&T is hustling
         $1,500 videophones.
             It’s easy to see why the videophone hasn’t made
         much progress. Who wants to get dressed up to make
         a phone call?
             What isn’t so easy to see is why the videophone gets
         so much hype. There’s a clue in the subhead of the
         Journal article, “An Alternative To Travel.” Look out
         American Airlines, United, and Delta, your days are num-
         bered. The hype really isn’t about the videophone at all.
         It’s about the coming revolution in the travel industry.
             Over the years, the greatest hype has been for those
         developments that promise to single-handedly change
         an entire industry, preferably one that’s vital to the
         American economy. Remember the helicopter hype
         after World War II? Every garage would house a heli-
         copter, making roads, bridges, and the entire automo-

                                      118
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02    12:23 PM   Page 119




                                  THE LAW OF HYPE



         bile industry obsolete overnight. Did Donald Trump
         get a helicopter? Did you get yours? (Donald actually
         did get his, but he had to give it back to the bank.)
             Then there was the manufactured-home hype. It
         was reported that the single most expensive product a
         family ever buys could be made on the assembly line,
         revolutionizing the construction industry.
             From time to time, no-frills food makes the head-
         lines. It is reported that this development will revolu-
         tionize the packaged-goods industry. Brands are out.
         People will read the labels and buy products on their
         merits rather than on the size of the brand’s advertising
         budget. It’s all hype.
             The latest overhyped development is that of the pen
         computer, which will revolutionize the personal com-
         puter field and make computers accessible to everyone
         whether they can type or not. It’s all hype.
             Not that there isn’t a grain of truth in every over-
         hyped story. Anyone with $580,000 plus tax can buy a
         little five-seat Bell helicopter. The pen computer might
         be attractive to a narrow segment of the market, espe-
         cially the traveling-salesperson crowd. The videophone
         could revolutionize the phone-sex industry, and there’s
         a substantial market for mobile homes and recreational
         vehicles, all manufactured on assembly lines.
             But, for the most part, hype is hype. Real revolu-
         tions don’t arrive at high noon with marching bands
         and coverage on the 6:00 P.M. news. Real revolutions
         arrive unannounced in the middle of the night and kind
         of sneak up on you.

                                       119
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 120




                           21
                       The Law of
                       Acceleration
            Successful programs are not built on fads,
                     they’re built on trends.




                                      120
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 121




            A fad is a wave in the ocean, and a trend is the tide.
         A fad gets a lot of hype, and a trend gets very little.
            Like a wave, a fad is very visible, but it goes up and
         down in a big hurry. Like the tide, a trend is almost
         invisible, but it’s very powerful over the long term.
            A fad is a short-term phenomenon that might be
         profitable, but a fad doesn’t last long enough to do a
         company much good. Furthermore, a company often
         tends to gear up as if a fad were a trend. As a result,
         the company is often stuck with a lot of staff, expen-
         sive manufacturing facilities, and distribution net-
         works.
            (A fashion, on the other hand, is a fad that repeats
         itself. Examples: short skirts for women and double-
         breasted suits for men. Halley’s Comet is a fashion
         because it comes back every 75 years or so.)
            When the fad disappears, a company often goes
         into a deep financial shock. What happened to Atari
         is typical in this respect. And look how Coleco
         Industries handled the Cabbage Patch Kids. Those
         homely dolls hit the market in 1983 and started to
         take off. Coleco’s strategy was to milk the kids for
         all they were worth.
            Hundreds of Cabbage Patch novelties flooded the
         toy stores. Pens, pencils, crayon boxes, games, cloth-
         ing. Two years later, Coleco racked up sales of $776
         million and profits of $83 million. Then the bottom
         dropped out of the Cabbage Patch Kids. By 1988
         Coleco went into Chapter 11.
            Coleco died, but the kids live on. Acquired by

                                      121
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 122




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         Hasbro in 1989, the Cabbage Patch Kids are now
         being handled conservatively. Today they’re doing
         quite well.
             Here’s the paradox. If you were faced with a rapid-
         ly rising business, with all the characteristics of a fad,
         the best thing you could do would be to dampen the
         fad. By dampening the fad, you stretch the fad out and
         it becomes more like a trend.
             You see this in the toy business. Some owners of hot
         toys want to put their hot toy name on everything. The
         result is that it becomes an enormous fad that is bound
         to collapse. When everybody has a Ninja turtle,
         nobody wants one anymore.
             The Ninja turtle is a good example of a fad that col-
         lapses in a hurry because the owner of the concept got
         greedy. The owner fans the fad rather than dampening it.
             On the other hand, the Barbie doll is a trend. When
         Barbie was invented years ago, the doll was never
         heavily merchandised into other areas. As a result, the
         Barbie doll has become a long-term trend in the toy
         business.
             The most successful entertainers are the ones who
         control their appearances. They don’t overextend
         themselves. They’re not all over the place. They don’t
         wear out their welcome.
             Elvis Presley’s manager, Colonel Parker, made a
         deliberate attempt to restrict the number of appear-
         ances and records the King made. As a result, every
         time Elvis appeared, it was an event of enormous
         impact. (Elvis himself contributed to this strategy by

                                      122
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 123




                          THE LAW OF ACCELERATION



         overdosing early and severely dampening his future
         appearances. Likewise Marilyn Monroe and James
         Dean.)
            Forget fads. And when they appear, try to dampen
         them. One way to maintain a long-term demand for
         your product is to never totally satisfy the demand.
            But the best, most profitable thing to ride in market-
         ing is a long-term trend.




                                      123
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 124




                            22
                        The Law of
                        Resources
                     Without adequate funding
                  an idea won’t get off the ground.




                                      124
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 125




            If you have a good idea and you’ve picked up this
         book with the thought in mind that all you need is a lit-
         tle marketing help, this chapter will throw cold water
         on that thought.
            Even the best idea in the world won’t go very far
         without the money to get it off the ground. Inventors,
         entrepreneurs, and assorted idea generators seem to
         think that all their good ideas need is professional mar-
         keting help.
            Nothing could be further from the truth. Marketing
         is a game fought in the mind of the prospect. You need
         money to get into a mind. And you need money to stay
         in the mind once you get there.
            You’ll get further with a mediocre idea and a mil-
         lion dollars than with a great idea alone.
            Some entrepreneurs see advertising as the solution
         to the problem of getting into prospects’ minds.
         Advertising is expensive. It cost $9,000 a minute to
         fight World War II. It cost $22,000 a minute to fight
         the Vietnam War. A one-minute commercial on the
         NFL Super Bowl will cost you $1.5 million.
            Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak had a great idea.
         But it was Mike Markkula’s $91,000 that put Apple
         Computer on the map. (For his money, Markkula got
         one-third of Apple. He should have held out for
         half.)
            Ideas without money are worthless. Well. . . not
         quite. But you have to use your idea to find the money,
         not the marketing help. The marketing can come later.
            Some entrepreneurs see publicity as a cheap way

                                      125
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 126




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



         of getting into prospects’ minds. “Free advertising” is
         how they see it. Publicity isn’t free. Rule of thumb: 5-
         10-20. A small public relations agency will want
         $5,000 a month to promote your product; a medium-
         size agency, $10,000 a month; and a big-time agency,
         $20,000 a month.
            Some entrepreneurs see venture capitalists as the solu-
         tion to their money problems. But only a tiny percentage
         succeed in finding the funding they need this way.
            Some entrepreneurs see corporate America as
         ready, willing, and financially able to get their off-
         spring off the ground. Good luck, you’ll need it. Very
         few outside ideas are ever accepted by large compa-
         nies. Your only real hope is finding a smaller company
         and persuading it of the merits of your idea.
            Remember: An idea without money is worthless. Be
         prepared to give away a lot for the funding.
            In marketing, the rich often get richer because they
         have the resources to drive their ideas into the mind.
         Their problem is separating the good ideas from the
         bad ones, and avoiding spending money on too many
         products and too many programs (chapter 5: The Law
         of Focus).
            Competition is fierce. The giant corporations put a
         lot of money behind their brands. Procter & Gamble
         and Philip Morris each spend more than $2 billion a
         year on advertising. General Motors spends $1.5 bil-
         lion a year.
            Life can be unfair for the smaller marketer facing
         larger competitors. Consider A&M Pet Products, a

                                      126
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 127




                            THE LAW OF RESOURCES



         small company in Houston, Texas. A&M invented
         “clumping” cat litter, one of the most important break-
         throughs in the category. The concept is simple. When
         cats use the litter box, this new type of litter clumps the
         waste into balls, which are easily scooped out and dis-
         posed of. There is no need to replace the entire box.
            The brand, called Scoop Away, took off wherever it
         was introduced. This quickly got the attention of
         Golden Cat Corporation, which has the No.1 cat litter
         brand, Tidy Cat.
            Recognizing a threatening idea when they see one,
         Golden Cat introduced their own version of clumping
         cat litter, called Tidy Scoop. Not only, did they jump
         on A&M’s idea, they also borrowed the Scoop part of
         their brand name. (How unfair can you be?)
            The winner of this cat fight will probably be deter-
         mined by money. Who has the most money to drive in
         the idea?
            Unlike a consumer product, a technical or business
         product has to raise less marketing money because the
         prospect list is shorter and media is less expensive. But
         there is still a need for adequate funding for a techni-
         cal product to pay for brochures, sales presentations,
         and trade shows as well as advertising.
            Here is the bottom line. First get the idea, then go
         get the money to exploit it. Here are some short cuts
         you could take:

             • You can marry the money. Georgette Mosbacher
               married Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher

                                      127
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 128




                 THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING



               in 1985. Three years later, Ms. Mosbacher
               bought La Prairie, a Swiss cosmetics firm, for
               $31.5 million. Where did she get the money?
               From everyone. Venture capitalists, La Prairie
               distributors in Switzerland and Japan, plus her
               own and her husband’s resources. In the first year
               under Georgette Mosbacher’s control, La
               Prairie’s sales were up 30 percent. Then she sold
               out at a hefty profit.
             • You can divorce the money. Frances Lear arrived in
               New York in 1985 at the age of 61. Freshly divorced
               from her television producer-husband Norman
               (“All in the Family”) Lear, she was determined to
               launch a magazine for women over 40. She was
               prepared to spend $25 million of her expected $112
               million settlement on the project. By its fifth issue,
               Lear’s magazine had 350,000 readers.
             • You can find the money at home. Donald Trump
               would never have gotten anywhere without Dad’s
               millions behind him.
             • You can “share” your idea by franchising it. Tom
               Monaghan was able to put Domino’s Pizza on the
               map by pursuing an aggressive program of fran-
               chising his home delivery idea.

            So far we’ve been talking about smaller companies
         and their fund-raising strategies. What about a rich
         company? How should it approach the law of
         resources? The answer is simple: Spend enough. In
         war, the military always errs on the high side. Do you

                                      128
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 129




                            THE LAW OF RESOURCES



         know how many rations were left after Operation
         Desert Storm? A lot. So it is in marketing. You can’t
         save your way to success.
            The more successful marketers front load their
         investment. In other words, they take no profit for two
         or three years as they plow all earnings back into mar-
         keting.
            Money makes the marketing world go round. If you
         want to be successful today, you’ll have to find the
         money you need to spin those marketing wheels.




                                      129
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 130




                            Warning

            We would be remiss if we did not warn our readers
         about the potential dangers of trying to apply the laws
         of marketing within an existing organization. Many of
         these laws fly in the face of corporate ego, convention-
         al wisdom, and the Malcolm Baldrige awards.
            The law of perception runs counter to the corporate
         culture of most companies where trying to be better is
         deeply ingrained. People are forever running around
         and “benchmarking” the leader in the category and
         then setting out to “beat their specs.” It’s what the qual-
         ity movement is all about.
            The law of leadership is tough for many to swallow.
         Most people want to believe they got to the top by
         being better, not by being first.
            So beware! Management won’t take kindly to any
         suggestions that will take the emphasis off their better
         product strategy.
            The law of sacrifice could cause you problems.
         Offering everything for everybody is deeply ingrained
         in most organizations. If you have any doubts, just

                                      130
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 131




                                     WARNING



         stroll down the aisles of any supermarket. What you
         will find is variation upon variation of sizes, flavors,
         and forms. It boggles the mind. Why this happens is
         painfully obvious. Nobody wants to focus.
             Large companies have offices filled with young,
         bright marketing people. Do you expect them to just
         sit there and do nothing? They feel compelled to tinker
         and make improvements. After all, how can they make
         their mark on the organization?
             So beware! Those young, bright marketing people
         will not take kindly to any efforts to curtail their tin-
         kering.
             The law of focus suggests owning a word in the
         prospects’ minds. What word does your company own
         in the minds of your prospects? “I don’t know,” might
         be your response. “We make a variety of products for
         many different industries.”
             So beware! You have some pruning to do, which,
         isn’t going to be easy to sell to the powers that be.
             The law of perspective will frustrate anyone looking
         for quick marketing victories. Companies want to see
         instant results.
             So beware! Those accountants will give you a hard
         time in the short term.
             The law of line extension is the most dangerous law
         of all to deal with. In this case, you have to be prepared
         to demolish what management holds to be a basic
         truth: Big successful brands have an equity that can be
         exploited to encompass different kinds of products.
             Line extension makes eminent sense in the board-

                                      131
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 132




                                     WARNING



         room. You won’t find one director in a dozen who
         would be willing to challenge management on this
         critical issue.
            So beware! Management will not take kindly to any
         efforts to curtail their equity expansions. You may just
         have to wait them out. Management is mutable, but the
         laws of marketing are not.
            Thus are you duly warned. If you violate the
         immutable laws, you run the risk of failure. If you
         apply the immutable laws, you run the risk of being
         bad-mouthed, ignored, or even ostracized.
            Have patience. The immutable laws of marketing
         will help you achieve success. And success is the best
         revenge of all.




                                      132
22 Laws of Marketing   10/31/02   12:23 PM   Page 133




                             About the Authors


       Authors Al Reis and Jack Trout are probably the world’s best-
       known marketing strategists. Their books have been published
       in fifteen languages and their consulting work has taken them
       into many of the world’s largest corporations in North America,
       South America, and the Far East.
