                       A GU IDE TO PU RP O S E AND S UCC E SS

                Elon Musk’s Most Useful Ideas,
                            in His Own Words




THE                                            1+ MILLION
                                               SOLD IN THE
                                                 SERIES




BOOK
OF
E L ON
Fo reword by
NAVA L R AV IK A N T




                               ERIC JORGENSON
                                  Visuals by J A C K B U T C H E R
       ALSO FROM THE AUTHOR:


  The Almanack of Naval Ravikant: A Guide
         to Wealth and Happiness


The Anthology of Balaji: A Guide to Technology,
       Truth, and Building the Future
THE BOOK OF ELON
                    A GU IDE TO PU RP O S E AND S UCC E SS

                Elon Musk’s Most Useful Ideas,
                            in His Own Words




THE
BOOK
OF
E L ON
Fo reword by
N AVA L R AV I K A N T




                            ERIC JORGENSON
                               Visuals by J A C K B U T C H E R
Copyright © 2026 Eric Jorgenson
All rights reserved.


The Book of Elon
A Guide to Purpose and Success


First Edition


IS B N 978-1-5445-5075-6 Hardcover
       978-1-5445-5074-9 Paperback
       978-1-5445-5076-3 Ebook
         F O R MY P R O G E N Y…


THE REASON I DO (ALMOST) EVERYTHING.
CONTENTS


NOTES ON THIS BOOK                   15
FOREWORD                             17
ERIC’S WELCOME TO THIS BOOK          21


PART I: PURSUE PURPOSE
LIVING A PURPOSEFUL LIFE             31
   Be Useful                         32
   Fight for the Future              35
   Obsess for Success                38
   Start Before the World Is Ready   40
   Create More than You Consume      41
   Work like Hell                    44
   Feel the Fear; Do It Anyway       47
   Seek the Nature of the Universe   49
THINK LIKE A PHYSICIST               53
   Obsess over Truth                 54
   First-Principles Thinking         58
   Thinking in Limits                63
   Aspire to Be Less Wrong           68
THE VALUE OF ENGINEERING             73
   Engineering Is Magic              74
   Engineering Wins Wars             77
   Engineering Creates Value         81
PART II: ULTRA HARDCORE WORK
WHAT IT TAKES                              85
   Take Responsibility                     86
   Earn Deep Understanding                 88
   Sleep on the Factory Floor              90
   Frontline Leadership                    91
   Adversity Forges Strength               93
   Eat Glass and Stare into the Abyss      96
BUILDING EXCEPTIONAL TEAMS                 99
   A Group with a Goal                   100
   Create a Culture of Builders          102
   Recruit for Exceptional Ability       105
   Retain Only Special Forces            107
   Feedback over Feelings                109
DESIGNING THE ORGANIZATION                111
   Remove Organizational Boundaries       112
   Simple Communication                   117
   Innovation Needs Permission to Fail    119
   Simplicity Wins                       124
   The Algorithm                         130
MANIACAL URGENCY                         139
   Don’t Waste Time                      140
   Speed Is Both Offense and Defense     141
   Do Things in Parallel                 143
   Break Down the “Impossible”           146
   Set Aggressive Timelines              148
WE MUST MAKE STUFF                       151
   The Real Work                         152
   The Factory Is the Product            154
   Attack the Constraint                 156
   Manufacturing Is the Moat             158
PART III: BUILDING COMPANIES
BECOMING A FOUNDER                                    163
   Starting Zip2                                      168
   Going All In, Again (Zip2 Earnings into PayPal)    173
   Listen Well, Correct Fast                          176
   Unite and Conquer                                  181
   From Exile to Exit                                 184
BUILDING TESLA                                        187
   The Mission to Protect the Planet                  188
   Going All In, Again (PayPal Earnings into Tesla)   192
   Building the First Prototype                       193
   Becoming Tesla’s CEO                               197
   Sequenced Strategy of Tesla                        199
   Keeping Tesla Alive                                202
   The Edge of Sanity                                 205
   A Whole New Kind of Car Company                    207
   Give People More for Less                           211
   The Battle of Public Perception                    214
   Founding SolarCity                                 216
BUILDING SPACEX                                       219
   The Only One Crazy Enough for Space                220
   I Expected to Lose Everything                      222
   Rockets from First Principles                      228
   Keeping SpaceX Alive                               231
   Landing NASA Contracts                             234
   You Have to Blow Things Up                         236
   Building the Just Barely Possible                  240
   Optimizing for Mass to Mars                        246
PART IV: ON BEHALF OF HUMANITY
BUILDING OUR FUTURE                                         251
   Companies Are Philanthropy                               252
   Companies Create Wealth for All                          254
   Companies to Start                                       258
   Companies Drive Progress                                 262
THE AGE OF ABUNDANCE                                        265
   The End of Scarcity                                      266
   Exponential Intelligence                                 268
   Upgrading the Human Mind                                 269
   The Last Human Drivers                                   276
   Sustainable Abundance                                    280
OUR EXISTENTIAL RISKS                                       283
   This Is the Best Time to Be Alive                        284
   World War III                                            287
   Regulation Accumulation                                  290
   Unsustainable Energy                                     294
   Misaligned Artificial Superintelligence                  297
   Population Collapse                                      304
   Asteroids and Comets                                     310
BECOMING MULTIPLANETARY                                      311
   Becoming Multiplanetary Is an Evolutionary-Scale Event   312
   If You Love Life, Protect It                             316
   The Gateway to Mars                                      318
   Building the New World                                   323
   Colonizing the Galaxy                                    329
BONUS
THE 69 CORE MUSK METHODS     335
TIMELINE OF ELON MUSK        339
ELON’S RECOMMENDED READING   343
WANT MORE?                   355
APPRECIATION                 357
ABOUT THE AUTHOR             361
SOURCES                      363
N OTES ON THIS BOOK


This is a book of Elon’s ideas in his own words. I built this book
entirely out of transcripts, tweets, and interviews over his
entire life to date. The body of this book comes directly from
him. On this, a few important points:


→ Transcripts have been edited for clarity, brevity, and flow
  multiple times.
→ Given potential for fakes, edits, and misquotes, I can’t be
  certain of every source’s authenticity.
→ Please verify phrasing with a primary source before citing
  Elon from this book.
→ Please interpret generously.


Everything in this book is taken out of context. To create this
book, I recontextualized ideas in an attempt to make them
more accessible, useful, and memorable.


As ideas passed through time, space, and medium, phrasing
may have shifted in flight. Every effort was made to keep the
original intent, but errors are possible. His original intent
may be different from your interpretation in a different time,
format, and context.


                                      N otes on T his B ook  · 1 5
All brilliance in this book is Elon’s; any mistakes are mine.



HIGHLIGHTS
Highlights are used to summarize or punctuate an idea. You
could flip through the book reading just these and find valu-
able ideas. Highlights are easy to spot because they look like
this:




I am a highlight.




BOLDED QUESTIONS
Many excerpts are from interviews; some are written to pro-
vide proper context. The questions help create the feeling of
an intimate dialogue between you and Elon.



SKIP AROUND
Jump to anything that interests you and skip anything that
doesn’t. This is a choose-your-own-adventure book, though
some ideas build on previous examples.




16 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
F OREWORD
                            — BY N AVA L R AV I K A N T




You’re holding in your hands the only book an entrepreneur
needs. A lone founder takes a unique journey to discover and
encapsulate the truth into a product. Weighted by responsi-
bility and expectation, the founder seeks out mentors and
books—but the best mentors can’t be hired, and the books
are either anecdotal or academic. The only reliable teacher is
bitter experience.


In this book, Eric put his ego aside and did the thankless work
of compiling Elon’s best lessons, in Elon’s own words, as prac-
tical as possible. This isn’t a tedious biography or recounting of
events, it’s the explanation and the manual. An eager co-founder
stole my first copy, and my coworkers will get the next twenty.


Elon is the greatest entrepreneur since Steve Jobs, but he isn’t
just a copy. History doesn’t repeat, but it does rhyme, and it’s
the occasional Napoleon, whether in science, art, or politics,
who appears and reroutes the inexorable forces of history with
a unique vision and drive. Hard work is common, intelligence
uncommon, courage rare—and Elon combusts all three.


                                                 F oreword  · 1 7
The banal observation is that he’s a founder of Tesla, SpaceX,
OpenAI, and Neuralink. These companies, however, are just
means to products—the self-driving cars, the autonomous
robots, the thinking machines, and the awe-inspiring, ground-
shattering, heavy rockets that thunder into space and land on
their toes. Even the products are just a means unto the mission.
If it’s allowed by the laws of physics, and takes us into our sci-fi
dreams, Elon will drag us there.


The wealth, the fame, and the envy are a byproduct. Crabs in
the gravity well, blinded by politics, will point to his father’s
and the government’s money. But envy says more about the
envious than the envied. Elon sleeps on the factory floor,
doubles down every time, and never gives up. The people
worth impressing are impressed, and millions of children
are inspired to make real change. Culture is downstream of
the technology that enables us to be generous and free, and
Elon will be remembered long after the big talkers and small
doers are forgotten.


As Chief Engineer, Elon reminds us that building value
is building things, not financing or managing them. It’s a
better world when the richest man is one who creates wealth,
rather than shuffles it around, or seizes it in the name of the
people.


Wealth, as the physicist David Deutsch wrote, is the set of
physical transformations that we can effect—true for both
individuals and societies. The main component of wealth is
knowledge, not capital. By creating new knowledge, and then
instantiating it in products that are duplicated and distributed,
Elon and his fellow entrepreneurs are engines of wealth cre-
ation and distribution.


18 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
You may have the opportunity to ask yourself: When humanity
went to the stars, what were you doing? When men walked
on Mars, were you mocking them or exhorting them? When
they mined the first asteroids and built the first space sta-
tions? When fleets of self-driving cars reclaimed cities from
parking and traffic? When the paraplegics rose up and walked
alongside us? When the robots took over the miserable and
repetitive work? Were you in the front row, cheering? Or sour-
faced in the bleachers, jeering?


There is even a third option—young or old, your life isn’t over
yet. Elon’s methods are copy-able, in matters big and small.
Eric has laid them out for you as plainly as possible. If your
motives are pure and greater than yourself, the world will
conspire in its subtle ways to help you. When one man shows
what’s possible, a million arise, not as followers, but as mis-
sionaries in their own right.


You don’t have to do what Elon does, and you don’t have to
do it his way, but this short life is best spent in the arena, on
something other than the mundane and insatiable self. Reject
the craving for comfort and social approval. Reorient to the
optimism of youth. Leave those talking and dividing, and get
on the path to learning and building.


Your energy is best spent with like-minded people who are
unstoppable on a mission to make something beautiful. Don’t
make the thing to make the money, make the money so that
you can make the thing. Don’t get paid for work, get paid so
that you can do your best work. Rise up, choose inspiration
over envy, and show your younger and older selves that the
desires of this life were completely and totally exhausted into
the universal will.


                                                 F oreword  · 1 9
ERIC’S WELCOME
TO THIS BOOK


Hello, and welcome!


I’m delighted you picked up this book. I’ve put thousands of
hours into collecting, curating, and editing Elon’s most useful
ideas for you.


You may be seeking purpose, a mission worthy of your life’s
effort. You might already have a clear purpose and seek the
tools for success. You will find both in this book.


Elon’s purpose is to help humanity survive and thrive. He thinks
in sweeping timescales, like a sci-fi epic. By funding and leading
SpaceX and Tesla, Elon Musk has done the entrepreneurial
equivalent of running a two-minute mile. Twice. At the same time.


Regardless of your industry, mission, or beliefs—there is
something to learn from this feat.


After seeing what Elon and his teams have accomplished, we
stand taller, and the universe seems smaller.


                           E ric ’ s W elcome to T his B ook  · 2 1
To me, Musk represents the idea that I am capable of more
than I ever imagined. Even more importantly, he shows that
together we are capable of the currently impossible.


He models our moral duty to grab the impossible and drag it
into the possible through massive effort, ingenuity, and force
of will. This is how we build an ever-better future.


In the past, the richest man on Earth was a monarch, oil heir,
or financier. Now, the richest man on Earth is an engineer,
entrepreneur, and American immigrant who has taken mas-
sive personal risks to build new things that solve problems on
a planetary—and interplanetary—scale. We are learning to
respect the builders more than the rulers.


Elon Musk has joined a lineage of legendary entrepreneurs
who transformed our culture. Henry Ford’s greatest impact
was creating car culture. Steve Jobs’s greatest impact was
on computer culture. Elon Musk’s greatest impact will be
advancing the culture of engineering, entrepreneurship, and
adventure over the next century.


Elon’s energy, vision, and his team’s achievements have stoked
a fire in my chest. I feel activated to advance human prosperity,
knowing that humans are a few years into an inspiring million-
year journey of knowledge and construction. Working on this
book gave me a new level of spiritual satisfaction and inspira-
tion. You and I may be ants, but we are building an intergalactic
cathedral.


I want you to stare down the biggest problems humanity faces
and attack them with furious ingenuity. If the next generation



22 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
has one million Musks, our grandchildren will flourish beyond
our wildest dreams.


One million Musks. That’s my dream for this book.


Seeing life-changing ideas dissolve into the algorithms breaks
my heart. I build these books to rescue knowledge and pre-
serve it in our most proven, permanent format.


When I create books, I focus on making them as useful as pos-
sible. No fluff, no filler. I hope you have a highlight on every
single page.


As you read, imagine you are out to dinner with Elon Musk.
You’re deep in conversation as he shares stories and ideas you
can apply in your own life and work. I hope you feel personally
tutored by the greatest living entrepreneur.


I focus entirely on Elon’s most useful ideas. We spend zero
pages on Elon’s family life or politics. This is not a biography
or a gossip column. My books are about sharing timeless ideas
that work.


This book has four parts:


1. Pursue Purpose: The foundations of a unique life
2. Ultra Hardcore Work: Mindsets and principles for achiev-
   ing the barely possible
3. Building Companies: Stories and strategies from PayPal,
   Tesla, and SpaceX
4. On Behalf of Humanity: How you can be part of elevating
   the future of humanity



                            E ric ’ s W elcome to T his B ook  · 2 3
The first half is filled with principles and tactics Elon uses to
guide his life and build his companies. I guarantee you will get
valuable ideas in the first few pages.


The second half has more stories. They share Elon’s adventures
and how he applied his principles to choose worthy missions
and built SpaceX and Tesla. We finish with Elon’s view of the
years ahead and how you can make an impact.


When you’re done reading (maybe a few times!), I hope you
enact more of Elon’s hardcore work ethic, boundless optimism,
and unabashed courage.


If this book resonates with you, know that we’re fast friends.
You’re joining a global community of allies in pushing progress.
I’d love to hear from you and hope you will help us spread these
ideas far and wide. Let’s leave humanity better than we found it.


Forward. Together.


Eric




24 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
“All of physics is either impossible or trivial.
    It is impossible until you understand
         it, and then it becomes trivial.”

           —Ernest Rutherford1
Now, here is Elon in his own words…
          PART I




PURSUE
PURPOSE
I don’t mind if my legacy is accurate or inaccurate,
as long as I die feeling I’ve done the right thing for
the future of Consciousness.2




30 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
LIVIN G A
PURPOSEFUL LIFE



 You can choose to be not ordinary.

 You can choose not to conform to the conventions
 taught by your parents.

 It’s possible for ordinary people to choose to be
 extraordinary.3




                         L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 3 1
BE USEFUL



Don’t aspire to glory; aspire to work.4



The measure of success in my life is: “How many useful things
can I get done?”


On a day-to-day basis, I wake up in the morning and ask, “How
can I be useful today?”


I want to maximize my utility. It’s difficult to be useful at scale.5


I can’t always get it right, but I aspire to make our future good.
Sometimes I make mistakes. But, I try to take the set of actions
most likely to improve the probability that the future will be
good.6


Try to be useful. Do useful things for your fellow human beings
and the world. It’s hard to be useful, to contribute more than
you consume. Can you have a positive net contribution to soci-
ety? Aim for that.7


I have a lot of respect for someone who puts in an honest day’s
work to do useful things. I admire anyone making a positive
contribution to humanity. Whether that is in farming, tech-
nology, entertainment, or whatever else. To anyone useful to
the rest of humanity: I admire you greatly.8


Q: How do you know if you’re helping?



32 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
I think about it mathematically. How many people you helped,
multiplied by how much help you provided each person, on
average. How many people you helped, and how much—that’s
the total utility (usefulness).9 It’s almost like the physics defini-
tion of true work. If you aspire to do true work, your probability
of success is much higher.10


For any product you’re trying to create, ask yourself the utility
improvement compared to the current state of the art, multi-
plied by how many people it would affect.


Building something that makes a big difference to a small
number of people is just as great as something that makes a
small difference for a vast number of people. Mathematically,
the total positive impact would be roughly similar for those
two things. It’s about trying to be useful.11


This is the mathematical first principles perspective—utility
and numbers. Is some simple app really making people’s lives
better? If it’s affecting a lot of people positively, even in a small
way, then yes, that is good.12


Not every product needs to change the world. Many people
do lots of useful things. Just ask yourself, is what I’m doing as
useful as it could be? The goal of an organization should be
usefulness to society. Not every product will change the world,
but if it’s making people’s lives better, that’s great.13


This is the same advice I give to my own children: “Follow your
heart in terms of what you find interesting or fulfilling to do.”14
I hope they will work extremely hard and become productive
contributors to society. I’m also hopeful they will do things



                                  L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 3 3
like engineering, writing books, or just in some way, adding
more than they take from the world.15




A useful life is worth having lived.16




34 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
FIGHT FOR THE FUTURE



   Fight for the things that make you excited about the
   future.

   The future will not get here fast enough unless we
   force it.17



I want to make sure there is a good future for humanity. We’re
on a path to understanding the nature of the universe, the
meaning of life. Why are we here; how did we get here?


I came to the conclusion that if we can advance the knowledge
of the world—if we can do things that expand the scope and
scale of consciousness—then we’re better able to ask the right
questions and become more enlightened. That’s the only way
forward.


I use scale and scope because we benefit from more con-
sciousness and more variety in consciousness. If everyone is
thinking about exactly the same things the same way, that may
not create new knowledge.18 I’m motivated by curiosity more
than anything.19




   I almost had an existential crisis trying to figure
   out “What does it all mean? What’s the purpose of
   things?”


                              L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 3 5
In college, I would wonder about the future and what areas
were really going to have an important impact on the future
of humanity as a whole. This wasn’t for a paper, just what I
thought about in the shower. I came up with five areas.20


The three areas I thought would have the biggest positive
impact on the future of humanity were the internet, the
transition to sustainable energy, and space exploration—in
particular the extension of life to multiple planets.21


The other two, artificial intelligence and rewriting genetics,
were a little more uncertain in terms of net benefit. They could
be a double-edged sword, and we’re not sure which edge is
the worst.22


I didn’t ever expect to be involved in space exploration and
expansion, but it seemed important to me even then. Even-
tually, with the capital from selling PayPal, I was able to work
on all three.23


Q: What would you say is your most core skill?




I don’t worship anything, but I devote myself to the
advancement of humanity using technology.



My core personal competence is technology. If something has
to be designed or invented and you must ensure the value of
the thing you create is greater than the cost of the inputs—
that’s my core skill.24


36 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
I look at the future from the standpoint of probabilities. It’s
a branching stream of probabilities, and actions we can take
now affect those probabilities: Accelerate something, slow
down another thing, or maybe introduce something new.25


You have to ask, What are we doing to move toward the paths
likely to make for a good future? That is what I care about.
We’re all projecting out to the future in some way, and if you
think we’re going to end up in some terrible situation, that’s
depressing.26


I’m interested in affecting the future in positive ways. I want
to build wondrous new technologies where you feel awe when
you see it: “How does that even happen? How is that possible?”27


I’m not trying to be some sort of savior; that’s not my goal.
The importance of these things just seems obvious to me. If
it seems like the obvious thing to do, I’m not sure why you
would do anything else. We want to maximize the happiness
of our population, propagate into the future as far as possible,
and understand the nature of reality. Everything else follows
from that.28




   Remember the future.29




                                L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 3 7
OBSESS FOR SUCCESS



Doing something I enjoy, which is useful for other
people—that gives me satisfaction.30



I didn’t aspire to create companies as a kid. I just liked com-
puters. Don’t start a company because you want to be an
entrepreneur or because you want to make money. It is better
to approach from this angle: What is a useful thing you could
build that you wish existed in the world?31


I do not start companies from the standpoint of asking, “What’s
the best risk-adjusted rate of return?” or what I think could
be successful. I just find things that need to happen, and try
to make them happen. I thought these things needed to get
done. If the money was lost, okay. It was still worth trying.32


Try to find an overlap of your talents and what you’re inter-
ested in. You may have skill in something but don’t like doing
it. Try to find work that is a good combination of things you
are inherently good at but also like doing.33


Then, try to get other people to work with you to create that
thing. Keep making it better and better. If you create some-
thing useful, money will be the result. That’s the way a properly
working economy rewards the creation of useful goods and
services.34


Successful entrepreneurs come in all sizes, shapes, and fla-
vors. I’m not sure there’s any one particular trait that makes


38 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
them. However, if there is one to focus on, it would be to have
an obsessive nature about the quality of the product. In this
context, being obsessive-compulsive is a good thing.35


Given that, really really, really liking what you do is a big advan-
tage. It’s important to like whatever you’re doing. Life is too
short to spend it doing something you don’t like.36


If you like what you’re doing, you think about it even when
you’re not working. It’s something your mind is drawn to. If
you don’t like it, it’s much harder to make yourself work.37


If you’re creating something you love and think other people
will love, it’s much easier to sacrifice the time and effort. If it
doesn’t work out, you won’t regret it.38




   My way of dealing with mental problems is to
   make sure you really care about what you’re
   doing—and take the pain.39




                                 L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 3 9
START BEFORE THE WORLD IS READY



We say the things we believe, even when
sometimes those things we believe are delusional.40



When you’re building a radically new product, people don’t
know they want it yet, because it’s just not in their scope.
Around 1946–1948, when they first started making TVs, they
did a famous nationwide survey: “Will you ever buy a TV?” and
around 96 percent of respondents said, “No.”41




In the beginning of Tesla, no one told us they
wanted an electric car…I heard that zero times.42

If you need encouragement, don’t start a
company.43



Getting people to believe in you and what you’re doing is
important. In the beginning, very few people will believe in
you or what you’re doing. Over time, as you make progress,
evidence will build. More and more people will start to believe.




40 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
CREATE MORE THAN YOU CONSUME



   Examine your beliefs of the economy.



The economy is a positive-sum game, a “grow the pie” situation.
Those who assume the economy is zero-sum believe the only
way to get ahead is by taking things from another.


But obviously the economy today is much, much greater than it
was in the past. The economic output per person is massively
greater than the past. Obviously the pie has grown, and grown
much faster than the population has grown.44




   I put a lot of stock in having a grow-the-pie
   mindset, not a zero-sum mindset.45



When I see people (even some smart people) with a bad atti-
tude or doing things that seem morally questionable, it’s often
because they have a zero-sum mindset.


They don’t realize they have a zero-sum mindset, or at least
don’t realize it consciously. Those who have a zero-sum mind-
set believe the only way to get ahead is by taking things from
others. Those who believe the pie is fixed believe the only way
to have more pie is to take someone else’s pie. This is obviously
false.46


                                L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 4 1
In reality, there’s a lot of pie. The economic pie is not fixed. It
has grown dramatically over time. Make sure you’re not oper-
ating from a zero-sum mindset, especially without realizing it.
It will result in you trying to take things from others, which is
not good. It won’t benefit you.




It’s much better to work on adding to the economic
pie. Create more than you consume.47




42 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
           -    +




Create more than you consume.




               L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 4 3
WORK LIKE HELL



I am wired for war.48



Q: Why doesn’t the world have more Elon Musks?


If you think you want to be me or do the things I’ve done…I
would say you’re probably mistaken. Long periods of my life
have been very painful and difficult. I’m not sure people would
want to go through that.49


The amount I torture myself is next level.50 You need to have
some kind of rage demon in your skull that drives you.51


Q: Are you always working?


How many days a year do I not put in some meaningful amount
of work? Maybe two or three.52


You must be extremely tenacious. Work like hell. You have to
put in eighty- to one-hundred-hour weeks every week. This
will improve your odds of success.53


You need to work. Work hard. Like every waking hour. Particu-
larly if you’re starting a company, you need to work super hard.
Do the simple math: Somebody else is working fifty hours a
week and you’re working one hundred. You’ll get twice as much
done in a year.54 If other people are putting in forty-hour work-
weeks and you’re putting in one hundred, what takes them a
year, you will achieve in four months.55


44 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
You’re not going to create revolutionary cars or rockets in forty
hours a week. It just won’t work. Colonizing Mars isn’t going
to happen on forty hours a week.56




   Nobody ever changed the world on forty hours a
   week.57



I’ve done these things because I felt a strong compulsion to
do them.58 I’ve been burning the candle at both ends with a
flamethrower for a very long time.


From 2007 until 2022 was nonstop pain. There was a gun to
my head to make Tesla work. Pull a rabbit out of your hat,
then pull another rabbit. A stream of rabbits flying through
the air. If the next rabbit does not come out, you’re dead. It
took a toll.


You can’t be in a constant fight for survival, always in adrena-
line mode, and not have it hurt you. Fighting to survive keeps
you going for quite a while.59


With that said, I would say this to twenty-something me: I
think there’s some merit to not being too intense, and enjoy-
ing the moment a bit. Occasionally stopping to smell the roses
would probably be a good idea.60


When we were developing the Falcon One rocket on the Kwaja-
lein Atoll, this beautiful little island in the middle of the Pacific,
not once during that entire time did I pause and have a drink


                                  L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 4 5
on the beach. Now, I realize I should have had a drink with the
team on the beach…that would have been fine.61




If heat death will inevitably end the universe, it
actually is all about the journey.62




46 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
FEEL THE FEAR; DO IT ANYWAY



   Look fear straight in the eye and it will disappear.

   The nature of fear is that people don’t look at it.

   Look at it directly and it will be gone.63


Q: How do you think about making a decision when everyone
tells you it is a crazy idea?


First of all, I feel fear. It’s not as though I have the absence of
fear. I feel it quite strongly. But when something is important
enough and you believe in it enough, you do it in spite of fear.


You shouldn’t think, “I feel fear about this and therefore I
shouldn’t do it.” It’s normal to feel fear. If you don’t feel fear,
you definitely have something mentally wrong. Just feel it and
let the importance of your mission drive you to do it anyway.


I also think fatalism is helpful to some degree. If you accept the
true probabilities, it diminishes fear. When starting SpaceX,
I thought the odds of success were less than 10 percent and
I accepted I would probably lose everything. But maybe we
would make some progress. If we could just move the ball for-
ward—even if we died—maybe some other company could
pick it up and keep moving and our work would still have done
good.64




                                 L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 4 7
We should not be afraid of doing something just
because some amount of tragedy is likely to occur.

If our forefathers had taken that approach, the
United States wouldn’t exist.65



Q: How do you persevere through these hard challenges?
Where do you find the strength?


That’s not how I think. I think: “This is simply something
important. It must get done. We will keep doing it or die trying.”
I don’t need a source of strength for that. Quitting is not in my
nature. I don’t care about optimism or pessimism. Fuck that.
We’re going to get it done.66




I definitely emboldened over time.67




48 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
SEEK THE NATURE OF THE UNIVERSE



   I don’t know the meaning of life. I don’t think we
   can answer that question well…yet.68



We must expand humanity and consciousness to the point
where we are able to answer that question.69


It may be uncomfortable for a lot of people, but I think this is
a rational and logical philosophy. Basically saying, “We don’t
know what the answer is, but let’s try to find out.”70


I think we as humans collectively know part of the answer,
but only a tiny part at this point. If we can make civilization
last for a million years, we will probably know much more of
the answer.71


If we date civilization from the first written language, it was
about five thousand years ago. This is practically no time
at all. If civilization were to last a million more years, we’re
barely even at the beginning. Future humans will think of us
as ancient ancients, like cavemen.72




   This is the foundation of my philosophy: I am
   curious about the nature of the universe.




                               L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 4 9
We can see the archaeological evidence in the fossil record,
based on what we know of physics, how we came to be at this
point on Earth step by step. But that doesn’t explain how the
universe came to exist in the first place.73


How do a bunch of molecules develop consciousness and
feelings? From a physics standpoint, the chain of events from
the beginning of the universe to now is quite well understood.
There was a bunch of hydrogen gas that turned into complex
molecules and now an assemblage of complex molecules—us
humans who can feel, talk, and think. Apparently if you leave
enough hydrogen gas sitting around long enough, it starts
talking to itself. That’s basically what happened here.74


Assuming you believe the physics, which appear to be true,
the universe started off as quarks and electrons and quickly
became hydrogen, helium, lithium, most of the periodic table.
Mostly hydrogen, though. Then, over a long period of time—
13.8 billion years—that hydrogen became sentient.75


Where along the path from a bunch of hydrogen to human
beings did consciousness start? It’s crazy.76 I wonder, is
everything conscious or is nothing conscious? Maybe it’s just
degrees of consciousness or concentrations of consciousness.77


Total collective consciousness is how many people there are
times the average amount of consciousness per person. If
we can expand consciousness by creating more humans and
more digital intelligence, then our opportunity to understand
the meaning of life is that much greater. I would call this the
philosophy of curiosity—to better understand the nature of
reality.78



50 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
What I think Douglas Adams was saying in his book The Hitch-
hiker’s Guide to the Galaxy is “The universe is the answer.” We
need to figure out what questions to ask about the answer
that is the universe. The question is the hard part, and if we
can properly frame the question then the answer, relatively
speaking, is easy.


We need to expand the scope and scale of consciousness in
order to understand what questions to ask of the universe.
This is the path forward. If we do, we will be better able to
understand the nature of the universe and understand the
meaning of life. As just one example, we have to get back to the
moon and build a science base there. I think we could learn a
lot about the nature of the universe.79




                                L iving a P urposeful L ife  · 5 1
THINK LIKE A PHYSICIS T



 I try to be hyperrational.

 If the reasoning fits, and you’re not violating the
 laws of physics, that’s the thing you should try to
 do.

 These things just don’t seem that crazy to me.80




                              T hink like a P hysicist  · 5 3
OBSESS OVER TRUTH



Start somewhere. Then be prepared to question
your assumptions, fix what you did wrong, and
adapt to reality.81



I am obsessed with truth. Obsessed.82 If you’re going to come
up with a good solution, the truth is really, really important.83


This obsession with truth is why I studied physics, because
physics attempts to understand the truth of the universe. Phys-
ics is about finding the provable truths of the universe, and
finding truths that have predictive power.84




54 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Physics    Everything else is
is law.    a recommendation.




          T hink like a P hysicist  · 5 5
Physics is law. Everything else is a
recommendation. I’ve met many people who
can break the laws of man, but I have never met
anyone who could break the laws of physics.



For me, physics was a natural thing to study. It was intrin-
sically interesting to understand the nature of the universe.
I also studied computer science and information theory to
understand logic. (Information theory studies the transmis-
sion, processing, extraction, and use of information.) There’s
an argument that information theory is actually operating at
a more fundamental level than physics.85




Truth matters to me a lot. Pathologically, it matters
to me.86



No matter how smart you are, you will make some number of
mistakes. Everyone makes mistakes. It’s just a question of how
many and how often.87


In business and personal life, wishful thinking causes a lot of
mistakes. You have to ask whether something is true or not. If
something ever feels too easy or doesn’t quite make sense…it
is probably wishful thinking.88


Wishful thinking is a natural human tendency. It’s a chal-
lenge to tell the difference between believing in a new idea


56 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
and persevering or pursuing an unrealistic dream. You need
to be rigorous in your self-analysis. Focus on something you’re
confident will have high value to someone else. Be rigorous in
making that assessment too.89


The real test of any startup is how well it responds to adver-
sity and adapts. When most things start out they don’t make
much sense, but as long as you adapt quickly you can make
the company work.




   Being tenacious and super focused on the truth is
   extremely important. Look for feedback from all
   sources.90

   If you have beliefs that are incompatible with a
   rocket getting to orbit, the rocket will not get to
   orbit. Physics is a harsh judge.91



Do you have the right fundamental axioms, or truths? Are
they relevant? Are you making the right conclusions based
on those truths? That’s the essence of critical thinking, and yet
it is amazing how often people fail to do that. Wishful thinking
is innate in the human brain. You want things to be the way
you wish them to be, so you tend to filter out information you
shouldn’t.92


That’s why I always assume we’re losing, even when it looks
like we might win.93



                                   T hink like a P hysicist  · 5 7
FIRST-PRINCIPLES THINKING
Q: Where does first-principles thinking come from?


When you want to do something new, you have to apply the
physics approach. Physicists discover counterintuitive new
things, like quantum mechanics. They do that by thinking
from “first principles”: building their reasoning from the
ground up.94




I would encourage people to use the mental tools
of physics and apply them broadly in life. They are
the best tools.95



The normal way we conduct our lives is reasoning by analogy.
That means we do something because it’s similar to something
else, or what other people are doing.


When you think this way, you only get slight iterations. It’s
easier to reason by analogy rather than from first principles,
so that’s what we do most of the time.96 And in most of life, we
should reason by analogy. Otherwise, mentally, you wouldn’t
be able to get through the day. It would be too much thinking.97


But for important things, that kind of thinking is too bound
by convention or prior experiences. You will hear, “It’s always
been done this way,” or “Nobody’s ever done it.” That is a ridic-
ulous way to think.


Don’t just follow the trends. You can avoid following trends


58 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
by thinking with the physics approach, first principles. It’s a
powerful, powerful method for life in general.


Look at the fundamentals and construct your reasoning from
there. Then see if you have a conclusion that works or doesn’t
work.98 It might or might not be different from what people
have done in the past.99


Q: How do you apply first-principles thinking?


Break something down to the most fundamental principles.
Start by asking: What am I most confident is true at a founda-
tional level? That sets your axiomatic base. Then you reason
up from there. Then you check your conclusions against the
axiomatic truths.


For instance, to approach any new technology problem, make
sure you’re not violating physics with a first-principles anal-
ysis. A basic question in physics would be: Am I violating
conservation of energy or momentum? If so, it’s not going to
work. That’s just to establish if this idea is possible.100


It’s hard to think this way. It takes a lot of effort. But if you’re
trying to do something new, it’s the best way to think.101


Q: How have you applied first-principles thinking to building
companies?


Here’s an example from early in building Tesla. People said
battery packs were too expensive to make cheap electric cars.
They assumed they would always be expensive, because they
had been in the past. That’s pretty dumb. If you applied that
reasoning to everything new, then you would never try any-


                                     T hink like a P hysicist  · 5 9
thing new. “Oh, nobody wants a car. Horses are great; we’re
used to them. They can eat grass. There’s lots of grass all over
the place. There’s no gasoline available. So people will never
buy gas cars.” People did say that, a lot.


People assumed batteries for electric vehicles would always
cost $600 per kilowatt hour. The first-principles approach to
battery costs is this: What are the batteries made of? What are
the materials that make up the batteries? What is the market
value of those material constituents?


It’s got cobalt, nickel, aluminum, carbon, some polymers
for separation, and a steel can. Okay, what if we bought that
amount of material at the London Metal Exchange? What
would each of those things cost? Oh, geez, it’s only $80 per
kilowatt hour. So clearly, we just need to think of clever ways
to take those materials and combine them into the shape of a
battery cell. That’s how I knew it was possible to build batteries
much much cheaper than anyone else realized.102




Great differences in technology exist in the world,
which even hardcore technologists are unaware of.

What is simple in one arena is often profound in
another.103



The first-principles approach is a good way to understand what
new things are possible. It doesn’t mean you’ll be successful,
but at least you can determine if success is one of the possi-


60 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
bilities, and that is important. This is how I decided to start
SpaceX.104


 First-principles thinking built SpaceX. Most people think,
“Historically, all rockets have been expensive. Therefore, in
 the future, all rockets will be expensive.” But that’s not true.105
 This is where it’s helpful to use the analytical approach again.106


The way we applied first-principles thinking to rocketry
was asking, “What are the materials that go into a rocket?”107
A rocket is made from aluminum, titanium, copper, and
carbon fiber. Break it down further and ask, “How much of
each material is used? Now, what is the cost of all these raw
components?”108


If you have them stacked on the floor and could wave a magic
wand to create the rocket, what would the cost of the rocket
be? We imagine the cost of rearranging the atoms was zero.109


That’s going to set the floor of the cost of the rocket. I call this
the “magic wand number,” the hypothetical best-case scenario.
For rockets, that turned out to be a relatively small number,
well under 5 percent of the current cost, in some cases closer
to 1 or 2 percent.110 The manufacturing must be very inefficient
if the raw material cost is only 1 or 2 percent of the finished
product.111


I was able to see a great deal of room for improvement.112 Now
our challenge was to figure out how to get the atoms in the
right shape more efficiently.113


That first-principles thought process around the rocket
became general purpose for all parts. I call it “The Idiot Index.”


                                     T hink like a P hysicist  · 61
How much more does a finished product cost than the cost
of its materials? If a part or product had a high Idiot Index,
we could cut the cost with more efficient manufacturing
techniques.114


A component that costs $1,000 when the aluminum it was
made of costs only ten dollars likely has a design that is too
complex or an inefficient manufacturing process. If the ratio
is high, you’re an idiot.


One part of the rocket, the half nozzle jacket, cost $13,000. But
it was only made of $200 worth of steel. I expect all my engi-
neers to know all the best and worst parts in their systems as
judged by the idiot index at all times.115


 That’s what I mean by thinking about things from a first-
 principles standpoint. If I had analyzed it by analogy and said,
“What are all other rocket companies doing? What do their
 rockets cost? What historically have other rockets cost?” That
 is reasoning by analogy, but it really doesn’t illustrate what the
 true potential is.116




The first-principles approach is a good way to
figure out counterintuitive solutions. It was a helpful
thing to learn.117




62 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
THINKING IN LIMITS
Another good physics tool is thinking about things “in the
limit.” Take a particular idea and imagine scaling it to a very
large or very small number. How do things change?118


The Boring Company is a great example. A common criticism
of the idea of tunnels is: The tunnel will get used up and there
will still be traffic congestion. They don’t realize there’s no real
limit to how many levels of tunnel you can have. You can go
much farther deep underground than you can build up. The
deepest mines are much deeper than the tallest buildings are
tall.


Ever notice that cities are built in 3D, but roads are only built
in 2D? You could build roads in 3D by building tunnels under
cities.119 You can alleviate any amount of urban congestion with
a 3D tunnel network.120


But, it’s difficult and expensive to dig tunnels the way they’re
currently done. The LA subway extension cost roughly a billion
dollars per mile to build.121




   If you do just two things, you can get
   approximately an order of magnitude
   improvement in tunneling.

   But I think you can even go beyond that.122




                                     T hink like a P hysicist  · 63
We need at least a tenfold improvement in the cost per mile of
tunneling. The first thing to do is to cut the tunnel diameter.
According to current regulations, a single road-lane tunnel
has to be twenty-six to twenty-eight feet in diameter. But if
you shrink that diameter to twelve feet, the area goes down by
a factor of four. This is a huge improvement, because the cost
of tunneling scales with the area. That’s almost a half-order of
magnitude (4–5x) improvement in cost per mile right there.123


Currently, tunneling machines work for half the time, then
stop. The other half of the time is putting in reinforcements for
the tunnel wall. If you design the machine instead to do con-
tinuous tunneling and reinforcing, that will give you a factor of
two improvement. Combine those and that’s a factor of eight.124


These machines are also far from being at their power or ther-
mal limits, so we should jack up the power to the machine. We
can get at least another factor of two there, maybe even four or
five. Currently, we’re not even close to the limits of tunneling
technology.125


Q: How does thinking in limits apply to manufacturing?


Let’s say we’re trying to figure out why a part or product is
expensive. Is it because of something foolish, or just because
production volume is too low?126


Ask, “If our volume was a million units per year, would it still be
expensive?” If it’s still expensive at a million units a year, then
volume is not the reason why your part is expensive. Maybe
something’s wrong with the design. Maybe you can change
the part to something not fundamentally expensive. That’s
thinking about things to the limit.127


64 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
If you are really good at manufacturing and producing at a high
volume, you can make anything for a cost that asymptotically
approaches the raw material value of the components, plus
any intellectual property you need to license. It’s a hard thing
to do, but it is possible.128


Q: How does thinking in the limit apply to design?


When designing a product, people often start designing with
the tools, parts, and methods they are familiar with. That’s
their default. That will lead to a product that can be made with
those tools and methods, but it is unlikely to be the perfect
product.129


The other way to think is to imagine the platonic ideal of the
perfect product or technology. What is the perfect arrange-
ment of atoms that would be the best possible product? Now
try to figure out how to get the atoms in that shape.130


Think through things in both directions. What can we build
with the tools that we have? But also, what does the “theoret-
ically perfect” product look like?131


The idea of the “theoretically perfect” product is going to be
a moving target because as you learn more, the definition for
that perfect product will change. You don’t actually know what
the perfect product is, but you can approximate a more perfect
product. Then ask, “What tools, methods, or materials do we
need to create to get the atoms in that shape?” People rarely
think this way. But thinking in limits is a powerful tool.132




                                   T hink like a P hysicist  · 65
Impossible is a strong word. It’s just a strong word.
I approach things from a physics standpoint, and
the word impossible is more or less banned in
physics.133



At SpaceX especially, we often consider what’s possible within
the absurd. If my team says something is impossible, I try to
open their minds to new potential solutions by asking, “What
would it take?”134




66 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
IT IS OK TO BE WRONG, JUST DON’T
    BE CONFIDENT AND WRONG.




                 T hink like a P hysicist  · 67
ASPIRE TO BE LESS WRONG
The mental tools of physics are powerful. They tell us to assume
we’re wrong and that our goal is to be less wrong. Aspire to be
less wrong. I don’t think you’re going to succeed every day in
being less wrong. But if you can succeed in being less wrong
most of the time, you’re doing great.135




It’s OK to be wrong. Just don’t be confident and
wrong.136



Aspirationally, you want to believe things proportionate to the
evidence. Not inversely proportional to the evidence.137




Most people can learn a lot more than they think
they can.

They sell themselves short by not trying.138



Read books, because the data rate of reading is much greater
than when somebody is speaking. What’s the output rate of
speech? A couple hundred bits per second, maybe a few thou-
sand per second if you’re going full tilt. You can get several
times that by reading. The main reason I didn’t go to lectures
in college was because the data rate was too slow.139



68 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   I encourage you to read a lot of books. Just read.
   Try to ingest as much information as you can.



I was always really interested in reading. When I was a kid, I
read everything I could get my hands on.140 Around nine or ten
I ran out of things to read in our house, so in desperation I read
the encyclopedia—which turned out to be a good idea. I found
all sorts of things I didn’t even know existed—a lot, obviously.


I’d recommend everyone read or skim through the condensed
version of the Encyclopedia Britannica. You can always skip
subjects. If you read a few paragraphs and know you’re not
interested, just jump to the next one.141


 Develop good general knowledge, so you at least have a rough
“lay of the land” of the full knowledge landscape. Read a broad
 range of material. How can you know what you’re really inter-
 ested in if you’re not at least doing a broad, light exploration
 of the knowledge landscape?142


As a kid, I played historical strategy video games, like Civili-
zation. This shows you how civilization formed. Through the
technology tree, you invent different things. You’d invent lit-
eracy, democracy, and gunpowder. You start to realize, “Oh
wow, there are stages to technology. You can’t have democracy
without creating literacy.” There are stages of technology and
development of ideas. That’s a helpful framework.143


It is important to view knowledge as a semantic tree. Make
sure you understand the fundamental principles (the trunk



                                   T hink like a P hysicist  · 69
and big branches) before you get into the leaves (the details),
then there is something for them to hang on to.144


Some ideas come from reading about a sad trend in technology.
When I read about the Concorde being retired, I was like, “Jeez,
we don’t even have supersonic transport anymore. That’s terri-
ble.” I never had a chance to fly on the Concorde. That seemed
like a terrible thing, so I started reading about it.


I learned the Concorde was designed back in the sixties.
Aerodynamics have improved a great deal since then, with com-
putational fluid dynamics. Engine efficiencies have improved
massively. Even if you just change the engines on the Con-
corde, you could double the range or thereabouts. I thought,
Well, what if we could figure out an efficient design that could
make it economically competitive to have a supersonic aircraft?
I started looking into it more and did the math on all of it.145


You can get super efficient and super fast when electric aircraft
have vertical takeoff and landing, and go supersonic. We could
make a breakthrough aircraft several generations beyond what
currently exists.146


Diving into SpaceX and Tesla, I had to learn how to make hard-
ware. I’d never seen a CNC machine or laid out carbon fiber. I
didn’t know any of those things, but if you read books and talk
to experts, you can pick them up quickly.147 I started going to
the Palo Alto public library to read about rocket engineering
and started calling experts, asking to borrow their old engine
manuals.148


Most people self-limit their ability to learn. It’s pretty straight-
forward—just read books and talk to people.149


70 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The physics background is helpful as the foundation. But in
rocketry I am self-taught, meaning I don’t have an aerospace
degree. I just read a lot of books and talked to a lot of people.150



   Talk to people from different walks of life, in
   different industries, professions, and skills. Try to
   learn as much as possible. Search for meaning.151




                                     T hink like a P hysicist  · 7 1
THE VALUE OF
EN GINEERIN G



 I spend 80 percent of my time on engineering.152




                       T he V alue of E ngineering  · 7 3
ENGINEERING IS MAGIC



Engineering is, for all intents and purposes, magic,
and who wouldn’t want to be a magician?153



Q: What drew you to engineering?




I have a physics background and grew up in an
engineering-centric household. I’m still more an
engineer than anything else.154



My dad is an extremely talented electrical and mechanical
engineer. We built model airplanes and circuit boards together
when I was a kid. He tutored me, and I didn’t even know it
at the time.155 I also did things like make model rockets. In
South Africa, there were no premade rockets. I had to go to
the chemist to get the ingredients for rocket fuel, mix it, and
put it in a pipe.156


There were lots of “engineery” things around me. When I asked
for an explanation, I got the true explanation of how things
work.157 When I was a little kid, I was really scared of the dark.
But I came to understand “dark” just means the absence of
photons in the visible wavelength—four hundred to seven
hundred nanometers. I thought, well it’s silly to be afraid of
a lack of photons. Then I wasn’t afraid of the dark anymore.158


74 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
I was very technology oriented as a kid growing up in South
Africa.159 With our first computer came books to teach yourself
programming. This was the coolest thing I’d ever seen. When
I was about twelve, I started programming and selling my own
games to buy new games. I was hooked. I’d spend money on
better computers, Dungeons & Dragons modules, and things
like that. I was nerdmaster3000.160


I wasn’t that much of a loner, but I was quite bookish. I was
reading all the time. I would be reading, working on my com-
puter, reading comics, that kind of thing.161


When I was young, I wasn’t sure what I was going to do when I
got older. I thought the idea of inventing things would be cool,
because I read a quote from Arthur C. Clarke: “A sufficiently
advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.” That’s
really true.


If you go back three hundred years, you’d be burned at the
stake for things we take for granted today. Being able to fly
is crazy. Being able to see over long distances, communicate,
and instantly access all the world’s information from almost
anywhere on the earth. This would all be considered magic in
times past. It actually goes beyond that. Many things we take
for granted today weren’t imagined in times past, even in the
realm of magic.


I thought if I could advance technology, that would be like
being a magician. That would be really cool.162


At one point, I was thinking about doing physics as a career. But
to really advance physics these days, you need new data. Phys-
ics is fundamentally governed by the progress of engineering.


                              T he V alue of E ngineering  · 7 5
There is always debate about, “Which is better, engineers or
scientists? Aren’t scientists better? Wasn’t Einstein the smart-
est person?” Personally, I think engineering is better because
without engineering, you do not have any new data. You hit a
limit.


You can be smart within the context of the limits of the data
you have, but unless you have a way to get more data, you
can’t make progress. Galileo engineered the telescope, which
allowed him to see Jupiter had moons. If you want to advance
civilization, you must address the limiting factor. The limit-
ing factor is the engineering. Therefore, you must address the
engineering.163


I certainly admire the discoveries of the great scientists.
They’re creating a deeper understanding of how the universe
already works. That’s cool—but the universe, in a way, already
knows that. They’re discovering what already exists.164




Science is discovering the essential truths about
what exists in the universe.

Engineering is about creating things that have
never existed before.165




76 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ENGINEERING WINS WARS
In Sun Tzu’s The Art of War, there is no chapter on technology.
It is an interesting book I’ve read many times. It’s packed with
wisdom, but there should be a chapter saying: “If you have a
decisive technological advantage, you can win with minimal
casualties to your side.”166


Technology plays a much stronger role in war than is generally
understood: technology viewed in the broadest sense, includ-
ing a better phalanx, or spears made of bronze, iron, or steel.
These can be big differences.167




   The Romans won their wars through technology.168



One of the advantages Romans had was good metallurgy. Their
swords were martensitic (an improvement over austenitic
metallurgy), so they were stronger. The Romans were often
fighting opponents whose swords would basically bend over a
Roman sword. If you’re in a sword fight and your sword bends
like a noodle…big disadvantage.169


The Romans were great engineers. Even things like building
roads gave them a military advantage. If you’re trying to march
an army somewhere fast, roads beat the heck out of a small
winding path through the forest.170


But when fighting outside the Roman empire, they sometimes
lost their wars because of their opponent’s technology. When
the Romans fought the Scythians, they did not have a good


                             T he V alue of E ngineering  · 7 7
counter to mounted war archers, especially if they got lured
into flat terrain. They were pretty much helpless against the
technology of a mounted archer.171




When there’s a rapid change in the rate of
technology, engineering plays a pivotal role.



If there is a big difference in the technologies—even if the
other side has more people, better generals, and is smarter—
the side with the advanced technology will win.172


The technology war of fighters and bombers during World War
II is fascinating. The US completely crushed it on bombers at
the end of the war, but they didn’t start out that way. At the
start of World War II in the Pacific, entire US squadrons were
sometimes shot down with zero Japanese losses. A total KO.
The US fighters at the beginning of World War II were not good
either. Their tactics were terrible, the aircraft were terrible,
and the training was incorrect, too.173


It’s interesting to see where they started out and how fast
things innovated. There was impressive design work by many
countries: Japan, the US, Germany, UK, Russia, and others had
some impressive fighter designs.174


It was a constant technological rock-paper-scissors game. One
country would make a plane, another made a new plane to beat
that one, then another country would make an even newer
plane. What really matters is the pace of innovation.175


78 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
When the rate of change of technology is high enough, or there
is a big technological difference between one side and the
other, then that technology dominates and you get a lopsided
victory.176


Many books on the strategy of war actually don’t address
technology, or do only in a tangential manner. But obviously,
if there is an overwhelming technological advantage, that
side will win even if the odds are dramatically stacked against
them.177


To use an extreme example (a limit case), if you can shoot
lasers from space to any spot on the ground by just pointing
at it, it would not matter if you’re fighting Julius Caesar, Heinz
Guderian, or Napoleon. They just got lasered from space.178


Most battles in history, because technology moved slowly,
were more about maneuvering, tactics, and strategy. But when
there’s technological discontinuity, it fundamentally changes
the whole situation. Wars in the modern era are very much
technology race wars. How fast can we create new technology?
The best example would be the nuclear bomb. Anyone who
made nuclear bombs first, won. That’s it. End of story.179


That was the reason for the US Manhattan Project. People
think it was a government project. I’d like to emphasize that
it was a creation of the physics community more than it was
the government. The government supported it, but it was a
decision and creation from the physics community. Without
them, it would not have happened.180


They simply came to the conclusion that they couldn’t let
Hitler have the bomb. So they made it first to be certain of it.


                               T he V alue of E ngineering  · 7 9
There isn’t a better example of a super weapon—anyone who
gets it wins.181




Play to win, or don’t play at all.182




80 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ENGINEERING CREATES VALUE
My mind feels like a wild storm. I have a fountain of ideas. I
have more ideas than I could possibly execute. Innovation is
not the problem. Execution is the problem.183


There is never a shortage of ideas. I find ideas to be somewhat
trivial, but the execution of good ideas is extremely difficult.
Prototypes are easy; production is hard. Production and being
cash flow positive is excruciating pain. Product ideas are
nearly irrelevant.184


You only build value in a company if you do hard work to solve
tough problems. That’s why companies are valuable. It’s why
they should be valuable, and largely why they are.


Tesla is a hardcore technology company. We do serious engi-
neering. We do real manufacturing as well. We do hardcore
manufacturing. Coils of aluminum and plastic pellets go into
one end of the factory and cars come out the other. We did all
the vehicle engineering, all the powertrain engineering, all
the software. The evidence for us solving hard engineering
problems is that Toyota, Daimler, and Mercedes buy electric
powertrains from us. If it was easy, they would do it.185




   The idea of going to Mars is not hard; that’s
   irrelevant.

   Getting to Mars is the hard part.




                              T he V alue of E ngineering  · 81
      PART II




ULTRA
HARDCORE
WORK
To those who quietly help advance the causes we
mutually believe in, knowing advancing the cause
is the only reward: thank you.186




84 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
WHAT IT TAKES



 If conventional thinking makes your mission
 impossible, then unconventional thinking is
 necessary.187




                                  W hat I t T akes  · 85
TAKE RESPONSIBILITY



I am CEO of these companies because I feel I’m
responsible for them, not because it’s the best thing
for my quality of life.188



I want to emphasize that sometimes—in fact, most of the
time—I get way too much credit or attention for what I do.
I’m just the visible element. The reason these companies are
successful is because we have extremely talented people at all
levels making it happen.189


I didn’t expect to be CEO of these big companies. It just sort
of happened that way.190 It was never my intent to run Tesla.
Running two companies is quite a burden. Sometimes when
people think of being a CEO, they imagine granting them-
selves lots of vacation and doing fun things. It doesn’t work
that way. What you actually get as CEO is a distillation of the
worst things going on in the company.191


Particularly, if you’re the CEO, you work on all the worst prob-
lems in the company. There’s no point in spending time on
things that are going right, so you only spend time on things
that are going wrong. Specifically, the things other people can’t
fix. The most pernicious and painful problems.192


Q: How do you manage through failure?


Managing through big failures is painful and difficult. It feels
terrible. The company looks at me to rally them, so I do. But I


86 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
feel terrible. Failure is a punch in the gut. Even when you’ve
got a lot of smart people working super hard to minimize the
probability of failure, it’s still there. And it’s quite significant.193




   Given the options, I prefer to learn from success.194




                                                 W hat I t T akes  · 87
EARN DEEP UNDERSTANDING
I wanted to know how the universe works and how the econ-
omy works. So, I studied physics and economics. You need to
be able to bring a lot of people together to create something.
It’s difficult to do something as just an individual, especially
for a significant technology.195


I was concerned if I didn’t study business I would be forced to
work for someone who did, because they would know special
things I didn’t know. I didn’t like the sound of that, so I made
sure I knew those things, too.196


Physics gave me the basics, a good analytical framework.197
Physics was rigorous, and we learned a lot of math. Later, I
was in an advanced securities analysis class in the business
school, and they were teaching people matrix math. I realized
if you can do physics math, then business math is super easy.198




My goals were to engineer products by having a
feel for the physics and to never work for a boss
with a business degree.199



One reason SpaceX could move so quickly is I made both the
engineering decisions and the spending decisions together in
one brain. In most companies, those decisions require at least
two different people.


There’s some engineering guy who’s trying to convince a
finance guy that this money should be spent. But the finance


88 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
guy doesn’t understand engineering, so he can’t tell if this is
a good way to spend money or not. Plus, they may not trust
each other. I’m making the engineering and spending deci-
sions together with all the information in one place. My brain
trusts itself.200


I’m head engineer, chief designer, and CEO at SpaceX, so I don’t
have to cave to some money guy. I encounter CEOs who don’t
know the details of their technology, and that’s ridiculous to
me.201




   To make the right decisions, you need to
   understand something at a detailed level.202




                                            W hat I t T akes  · 89
SLEEP ON THE FACTORY FLOOR
I’ve done many many stretches of one-hundred-hour weeks—
true one-hundred-hour weeks, sleeping roughly six hours per
day. I would not recommend that. That’s for emergencies, not
all the time.


During difficult times at Tesla I’ve had to do it, and sometimes
at the beginning of my earliest startups I did that. I wouldn’t
leave the office. I would sleep under my desk and work seven
days a week. Sometimes it’s necessary for success, or to avoid
failure.203


Tesla is pretty far up there in terms of work ethic, anywhere in
the world. The Tesla work ethic is substantially greater than
any other large car or manufacturing company in the US, that
I’m aware of.204


If there was a crisis situation, I slept on the floor. Most of the
time I did not sleep in a conference room because people could
not see me in the conference room—I slept on the floor in the
factory. Otherwise how would people know? They wouldn’t.
Seeing is believing. I slept on the floor outside the conference
room so they could see I was there.205


When the team is being asked to work super hard, I have to be
right there with them and they have to see it. If I fall asleep in
the middle of the factory floor at four in the morning and wake
up four hours later, they see that. They are like, “If the CEO is
willing to take that level of pain, I can do it too.”206


It was a world of hurt. I would wake up smelling like oil and
iron filings. It was rough. But I was asking people to really go all
out. I can’t expect them to go all out if I’m not doing the same.207


90 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
FRONTLINE LEADERSHIP
Think about war. Do you want the general in some ivory tower
or on the front lines? The troops fight harder if they see the
general on the front lines. Nobody bleeds for the prince in the
palace. Get out there on the front line. Show them that you
care and that you’re not in some plush office somewhere.208


If they see the general out on the battlefield, the troops are
going to be motivated. Wherever Napoleon was, that’s where
his armies would be at their best. Even if I don’t do anything
but show up, they’ll look at me and know I wasn’t spending all
night partying.209




    Never ask your troops to do something you’re not
    willing to do.

   Whatever the people at the front lines are doing, I
   try to do it at least a few times myself.210



 It is my firm belief that the separation of the workplace into
“executives” and “employees” does not create a good working
 environment. We want to create a system of equality without
 artificial barriers, so someone can start as a trainee and one
 day lead the entire company.


This is why we eliminate all special privileges of executives.
Everyone has equal access to parking, eating at the same
tables, and there are no management offices. I am convinced
that managers should work at the forefront, in the same work


                                           W hat I t T akes  · 91
environment as the entire team. Even though I run a company,
I still do not have my own office and often move my workplace
to the most challenging area in the factory.


Managers should always take care of their team before they
take care of themselves. The supervisor is there to serve his
team, not the other way round.211


All technical managers must have hands-on experience. For
example, managers of software teams must spend at least 20
percent of their time coding. Solar roof managers must spend
time on the roofs doing installations. Otherwise, they are like
a cavalry leader who can’t ride a horse or a general who can’t
use a sword.212


Always be smashing your ego. Internalize responsibility.
Whether you’re a CEO or any other role, do whatever it takes
to succeed.213


A major failure mode is a high ego-to-ability ratio. If your ego-
to-ability ratio gets too high, then you’ve broken the feedback
loop to reality.214


In AI terms, you’ll break your reinforcement learning (RL) loop.
You want to have a strong RL loop, which means internalizing
responsibility and minimizing ego.215




Do whatever the task is, whether grand or
humble.216



92 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ADVERSITY FORGES STRENGTH



   There is a great quote from Winston Churchill: “If
   you’re going through hell, keep going.”217



Q: Do you think overcoming challenges is something innate
in your personality?


I was driven as a kid, very willful. One story I remember: At
age six, I was grounded for some reason. I don’t remember
why, but I felt it was unjust. I really wanted to go to my cousin’s
birthday party.218 I escaped from my nanny and walked across
the city.


I was just learning to read, so I could barely read the road signs.
This was foolish, and something terrible could have happened.
But I was so determined I walked clear across the capital city
of South Africa at six years old.219


It was ten or twelve miles, much farther than I realized, and it
took me about four hours. As my mom was leaving the party
with my brother and sister, she saw me walking down the road
and freaked out. So I climbed a tree and refused to come down
until she promised not to punish me.220




   I seem to have a high, innate drive, and that’s been
   true even since I was a little kid.


                                              W hat I t T akes  · 93
When I was five or six, I thought I was insane. It became clear
other people’s minds weren’t exploding with ideas all the time.
I felt strange. It’s hard to turn it off. It might sound great when
it is on. But what if it doesn’t turn off? It’s like a never-ending
explosion.221


I was the youngest kid in my grade, so I was quite small. I was
kind of a smart aleck, too. It was a recipe for disaster. I’d get
called every name in the book and beaten up. Being small and
having violent bullies is a bad situation.222


There was a level of violence in my childhood that wouldn’t
be tolerated in any American school. It was like Lord of the
Flies. There were a couple of gangs that were pretty evil, and I
was one of their chosen victims. Partly because I stuck up for
another kid they were relentless on, that made me a target.223


The place where I grew up in South Africa was very violent.
Fighting was normal, it was part of the culture.224 It’ll certainly
toughen you up; that’s for sure. I was in a lot of fights I didn’t
want to be in. I got beaten up really badly in a few of them. I
was in real hardcore street fights, from about six to sixteen.225




I was almost beaten to death—within an inch of my
life at one point.226



I got to a reasonably good size around fifteen, and around six-
teen they stopped trying to beat me up, because it didn’t work
out so well for them anymore.227


94 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
People say they’re worried about the damage of words. People
worried about words have never been punched in the face.
Once you’ve been punched in the face, real hard, right on the
nose—you’ll take any words over that.228




   Adversity shaped me. My pain threshold became
   very high.229




                                         W hat I t T akes  · 95
EAT GLASS AND STARE INTO THE ABYSS



When starting a company, usually the beginning is
fun.

Then, it’s hellish for a number of years.230



You have to be focused on the short term and money coming
in when creating a company, because otherwise the company
will die. People think, “Oh, creating a company will be fun.”
It’s not. There are periods of fun, and there are periods where
it’s just awful.


You have to feel quite compelled to start a company. You must
have a high pain threshold. My friend Bill Lee says, “Starting a
company is like eating glass and staring into the abyss.” There’s
some truth to that.231


“Staring into the abyss’” means you’re going to be constantly
 facing the extermination of the company. Most startups fail.
 It’s like 90 percent—it could be 99 percent of startups fail.
 You’re constantly saying, “If I don’t get this right, the company
 will die.” This can be quite stressful.232


“Eating glass” means you’ve got to work on the problems the
 company needs you to work on, not the problems you want
 to work on. You end up working on problems you wish you
 weren’t working on. That’s “eating glass,” and it goes on for a
 long time.233



96 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
We were facing imminent death at SpaceX, Tesla, and SolarCity
for a long time. We’re no longer staring directly into the abyss,
which is great. It is there in the distance, but I’m not staring
right at it. There’s always going to be some amount of glass
that has to be chewed. But it’s less and less as time goes by.234




   If you don’t eat the glass, you’re not going to be
   successful.235



Q: How do you keep your focus on the big picture when you’re
constantly faced with being bankrupt in a month?


A very small percentage of mental energy is spent on the big
picture. You know where you’re generally heading, and the
actual path is going to be a zigzag in that direction. You’re
trying not to deviate too far from the path you want to be on,
but you have to, to some degree.236


Failure is not good. Failure is bad. But if something is import-
ant enough, then you do it, even though the risk of failure is
high. My advice for somebody who wants to start a company:
Bear in mind, the most likely outcome is failure. Reconcile
yourself to that strong possibility, and only if you still feel com-
pelled to, do it.237


That said, many people fear starting a company too much.
What’s the worst that could happen? You’re not gonna starve
to death; you’re not gonna die of exposure—really, what’s the
worst that could happen?238


                                              W hat I t T akes  · 97
BUILDIN G
EXCEPTION AL TEAMS



 The most important thing is to attract great people.
 Whether you are creating a company or joining a
 company, find an amazing group that you really
 respect.239




                      B uilding E xceptional T eams  · 99
A GROUP WITH A GOAL
A company is just a bunch of people coming together to create
a product or service. There’s no such thing as “a business,” just
a group pursuing a goal.240


How talented and hardworking that group is, and the degree
to which they are focused cohesively in a good direction, will
determine the success of the company. If you’re creating a
company, or if you’re joining a company, the most important
thing is to attract great people.241


A company is essentially a cybernetic collective of people and
machines. This collective is far smarter than an individual.242
That’s what a company is, and there are different levels of com-
plexity in the way companies are formed.243


Obviously, one person can’t build a whole rocket, engines,
launchpad, and everything. That’s impossible. We have thou-
sands of people at SpaceX. By piecing it out to different people
and using our collection of computers, tools, and machines we
can make lots of rockets, launch them into orbit, dock with the
International Space Station, and more.244




People sometimes forget a company is just a group
of people gathered together to make products for
fellow human beings.

As long as they make great products, the company
will have great value.245



100 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
To create a company, you have to convince others to join you
in your effort. You have to convince them there is a reasonable
chance of success and if there is success, the reward will be
commensurate with the effort.




   If you’re going to create a company, the first
   thing you should try to do is create a working
   prototype.246



When starting a company, create a demonstration, a mock-up,
or a sketch. This helps people envision it. Try to get to that
point as soon as possible, then iterate to make it as real as
possible as fast as possible.247


It doesn’t sink in for people until you actually have a physical
object they can use. Even when you can show something works
on paper, and the calculations are clear, it’s not the same.248


Anything can look good on PowerPoint. If you have an actual
demonstration, even in primitive form, it is much more effec-
tive in convincing people.249




   Fundamentally, if you don’t have a compelling
   product at a compelling price, you don’t have a
   great company.250



                           B uilding E xceptional T eams  · 1 0 1
CREATE A CULTURE OF BUILDERS



I consider one of my core responsibilities as CEO
is to have an environment where great engineers
can flourish.251



I don’t think I manage smart people; they manage themselves.
If someone is smart and talented, they can go anywhere and
do anything, anytime.252


I say, “Look, this is the goal we’re after. Do you agree with this
goal? If you do, then let’s try to get it done.”


 I’ll provide my opinion along the way. But it’s rare for me to
 actually insist on a particular thing. Once in a while I’ll say,
“You have to trust me on this one. We have to do this, and if it
 turns out to be a bad decision, we can all hold it against me
 in the future.”253


Another important principle: You want everyone to be able
to think like the chief engineer. They need to understand the
system at a high level, well enough to know when they are
making a bad optimization.254


Since a company is a group of people assembled to create a
product or service, the ability to attract and motivate great
people is critical to the success of a company. That’s the pur-
pose of a company. People sometimes forget this elementary
truth.



102 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
If you’re able to get talented, hard-working people to join the
company, work together, and have a relentless sense of per-
fection toward a common goal, you will end up with a great
product. If you have a great product, lots of people will buy it,
and the company will be successful.255


That’s why our most important consideration is recruiting the
best people. The output of any company is the vector sum of
the people within it. If we attract the most talented people over
time and our direction is correctly aligned, we will prevail.256




   A small group of technically strong people will
   always beat a large group of moderately strong
   people.257



What you see at SpaceX is the result of an incredible team.
Supertalented people who work like crazy to advance tech-
nology. They make this happen. My role is to make sure they
have an environment where their talents can come to the fore.
I can’t tell you how honored and grateful I am to work with
such a great team.258




   Do everything you can to gather great people.259




                           B uilding E xceptional T eams  · 1 0 3
Many companies suppress their talented, driven engineers.
Some are suppressed by being so comfortable they don’t pro-
duce much. There are a few places in Silicon Valley with good
engineers—but what are they producing? The output of that
engineering talent seems low, though maybe they are enjoying
themselves.


Tesla is not like that. We’re demanding. You’re going to get a
lot done and it’s going to be cool work, but it’s not going to be
easy. At Tesla, a superb engineer’s talents are used to a greater
degree than anywhere else.260


Tesla has been like a whole series of startups. So far almost all
have been quite successful, so we must be doing something
right.261




Only exceptional performance constitutes a
passing grade.262




104 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
RECRUIT FOR EXCEPTIONAL ABILITY



   When hiring, I look for evidence of exceptional
   ability, or at least exceptional aspiration.



Sometimes these things get messed up in recruiting. I some-
times wonder, “If Nikola Tesla applied to Tesla, would we even
give him an interview?” It’s not clear. They might say, “This
guy came from some weird college in Eastern Europe, he’s got
some odd mannerisms, we don’t know if we should give him
an interview.” I worry that’s what we’d do. Our response should
be, “Man, Nikola Tesla, this kid’s super smart. What does he
want? We’ll pay him anything!”263


I always ask my teams to give a lot of thought to who should join.
I recommend paying close attention to people who haven’t com-
pleted their grad or even undergrad, but are obviously brilliant.
Better to have them join before they achieve a breakthrough.264


 You’ve got to be willing to recruit hard for excellent people.
 When I was interviewing Bülent Altan for SpaceX, I told him,
“I heard you don’t want to move to Los Angeles because your
 wife works for Google in San Francisco. Well, I just talked to
 Larry Page, and they’re going to transfer your wife down to
 LA. So what are you going to do now?” He said he would come
 work for SpaceX.265


I have a great ability to tell if someone is a good engineer or not.
And I am good at optimizing the efficiency of an engineering
team. It helps that I’m quite good at engineering in general.266


                            B uilding E xceptional T eams  · 1 0 5
In interviews, I ask people to tell me the story of their career
and some of the tougher problems they dealt with, how they
dealt with those, and how they made decisions at key tran-
sition points. Usually that’s enough for me to get a good gut
feeling about someone. What I’m really looking for is evidence
of exceptional ability. Did they face difficult problems and
overcome them?


Usually the person who had to struggle with the problem really
understands it and they don’t forget if it was difficult. Ask
them detailed questions about it, and they’ll know the answers.
A person who was not responsible for that accomplishment
will not know the details.267




106 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
RETAIN ONLY SPECIAL FORCES
I worked very hard to collect the right expertise when starting
SpaceX. I tried hard to find a great chief engineer for the rocket,
but good chief engineers wouldn’t join and there is no point
in hiring the bad ones. I ended up being chief engineer of the
rocket. If I could have found somebody better, maybe we would
have had fewer than three failures.268




   Wherever the smartest, most driven people are
   choosing to work, that company is going to win.269



My philosophy for companies in the startup phase is a “Special
Forces” approach. The minimum passing grade is excellent. I
believe that’s the culture companies need to have if they’re
going to become successful.270


Q: Is building great teams and products just a question of
being well funded?


It’s not like if we just had more money we could spend it effec-
tively on R&D. That’s not how it works. If there was a factory
producing excellent engineers, that would be true. Except this
factory doesn’t exist. It’s incredibly difficult to find the right
talent, integrate them into an organization, and have it work
effectively. Money is not the constraint.


There are only a small number of excellent people, and they’re
hard to find. Engineers especially.271 At the end of the day, the



                            B uilding E xceptional T eams  · 1 0 7
competitiveness of any company is a function of the most tal-
ented and driven people. That is the team that’s going to win.272




The fundamental limitation is exceptional engineers.
There are not that many.273



Having a strong sense of purpose will attract the very best
talent in the world. If the work is enjoyable, the financial
rewards are good, and the product will change the world—
that’s a pretty powerful set of motivators.274


I’ve made several hiring decisions where I valued intellect over
heart and I think that was a mistake. I have tried to adjust
accordingly. It matters whether somebody is a good person.275


One test for assessing someone’s character is to look at the
character of their friends and associates. While people can
put up a mask themselves for their character, their friends and
associates will not. You can judge a person’s character by their
associates and to some degree by their enemies. If evil people
hate you, you might be doing something right.276




When hiring, look for people with the right attitude.
Skills can be taught. Attitude changes require a
brain transplant.



108 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
FEEDBACK OVER FEELINGS



   Physics does not care about hurt feelings. It cares
   about whether you got the rocket right.277



All bad news should be given loudly and often. Good news can
be said quietly and once.278


I give people hardcore feedback, but I try to always focus on
the substance of the discussion. I try to criticize the action, not
the person. We all make mistakes. What matters is whether
a person has a good feedback loop, can seek criticism from
others, and can improve.279


It’s not your job to make people on your team love you. In fact,
that’s counterproductive. I had a manager who would not fire
anyone. I told him, “You can’t tell people they have to get their
shit together, and when they don’t get their shit together—
nothing happens to them.”


Camaraderie is dangerous. It makes it hard for people to chal-
lenge each other’s work. There is a tendency to not want to
throw a colleague under the bus. That needs to be avoided.


Wanting to be everyone’s friend leads you to care too much
about the emotions of the individual in front of you rather than
caring about the success of the whole enterprise. Focusing on
that one individual can lead to a far greater number of people
being hurt.280



                            B uilding E xceptional T eams  · 1 0 9
I think it’s a real weakness to want to be liked. A
real weakness.

And I do not have that.281




110 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
DESIGNIN G THE
ORGANIZATION



 It must be okay for people to talk directly and
 make the right thing happen.282




                    D esigning the O rganization  · 1 1 1
REMOVE ORGANIZATIONAL BOUNDARIES



In any product, you can see the errors in the
organization’s structure. They will manifest
themselves in the product.



A major source of issues is poor communication between
departments. The way to solve this is to allow free flow of
information between all levels.


There are two schools of thought about how information
should flow within companies. The most common way is
chain of command. That means you always flow communica-
tion through your manager. The problem with this approach
is that, while it serves to enhance the power of the manager,
it fails to serve the company.


If, in order to get something done between departments, an
individual contributor has to talk to their manager, who talks
to a director, who talks to a VP, who talks to another VP, who
talks to a director, who talks to a manager, who talks to some-
one doing the actual work, then superdumb things will happen.
Then the info has to flow back the other way again. This is
incredibly dumb.


Problems get solved quickly when a person just talks to a
person in another department and makes the right thing
happen. Anyone can and should talk to anyone else according
to what they think is the fastest way to solve a problem for the
benefit of the whole company. You can talk to your manager’s


112 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
manager without his permission. You can talk directly to a VP
in another department. You can talk to me.


Communication should travel via the shortest path necessary
to get the job done, not through the “chain of command.”




   Any manager who attempts to enforce “chain
   of command” communication will soon find
   themselves working elsewhere.283

   You can talk to anyone without anyone else’s
   permission. Moreover, you should consider
   yourself obligated to do so until the right thing
   happens.

   Always view yourself as working for the good of
   the company and never your department.284



How can it possibly help Tesla for departments to erect barri-
ers between themselves or see their success as relative within
the company instead of collective? We are all in the same boat.


Managers should work hard to ensure they are not creating
silos within the company that create an us-versus-them men-
tality or impede communication in any way. This is a natural
tendency and needs to be actively fought.285




                         D esigning the O rganization  · 1 1 3
The point is ensuring we execute ultrafast and well.286



Q: How do boundaries between departments affect product
development?


You can see the organizational boundaries in the product.
You’ll often get a box in a box. You realize, “Why is this thing
in two boxes?” Turns out, because both teams thought they
needed an enclosure, the product ends up with an enclosure
in an enclosure.


One case from the Tesla Model 3: The battery pack had a top
enclosure and the car also has an underbody, right above it.
What’s the point of that? That doesn’t make any sense, but
because one team enclosed the battery pack and another team
wanted to have an enclosed body, it happened.


It makes sense from an individual team’s perspective, but you
don’t need a cover on the battery—there’s a car on top of it.
Putting the cover on the battery pack adds mass and cost, so
it should be deleted.




Find the design necessity of every part and every
process.287



Occasionally something seems necessary at the design level
but turns out unnecessary in manufacturing. Connect design-


114 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ers and manufacturers to make sure they communicate often.
The people on the assembly line should be able to immediately
grab a designer or engineer and say, “WHY DID YOU MAKE IT
THIS WAY!?’”


If your hand is on a stove and it gets hot, you pull it right off. But
if it’s someone else’s hand on the stove, it will take you longer
to do something about it.288


You cannot separate design, engineering, and manufacturing.
They need to be together because you are going to make mis-
takes. You want to identify and fix those mistakes today, right
now. And if you separate them, the mistakes will fester. Let
the manufacturers put the designers’ hands on the stove too.289


Whenever there are problems to solve, don’t just meet with
your managers. Do a skip level, where you meet with the level
right below your managers.




   Physically go to where the problem is,
   immediately.290



One of my rules is “Go as close to the source as possible.”


We were trying to determine how thick Starship’s walls should
be. Rather than only talking to the company’s executives, I
talked to some of the workers actually doing the welding. I
asked what they thought was safe. The line workers thought
the tank walls could get as thin as 4.8 millimeters.


                            D esigning the O rganization  · 1 1 5
“What about four?” I asked.


“That would make us pretty nervous,” the workers replied.


“Okay,” I said, “Let’s try four millimeters.”


It worked.291




116 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
SIMPLE COMMUNICATION
Don’t use acronyms or nonsense words for objects, software,
or processes. In general, anything that requires an explana-
tion inhibits communication. We don’t want people to have
to memorize a glossary just to function.


I noticed a creeping tendency to use made-up acronyms at
SpaceX and Tesla. Excessive use of made-up acronyms is a
significant impediment to communication, and keeping com-
munication clear as we grow is incredibly important.


A few acronyms here and there may not seem so bad, but if
a thousand people are making these up, over time the result
will be a huge glossary that we have to issue to new employees.
No one actually remembers all these acronyms, and people
don’t want to seem dumb in a meeting, so they just sit there
in ignorance.


I told people the acronyms needed to stop immediately or I
would take drastic action. Unless an acronym is approved by
me, it should not enter the SpaceX glossary. If there is an exist-
ing acronym that cannot reasonably be justified, it should be
eliminated.


The key test for an acronym is to ask whether it helps or hurts
communication. An acronym that most engineers outside of
SpaceX already know, such as GUI (graphical user interface),
is fine to use. It is also okay to use a few acronyms or contrac-
tions every now and again, assuming I have approved them. For
example, we use MVac and M9 instead of Merlin 1C-Vacuum or
Merlin 1C-Sea Level. But they need to be kept to a minimum.292




                          D esigning the O rganization  · 1 1 7
The most simple, straightforward, low-ego terms
are generally best. You want to close the loop on
reality hard.293




118 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
INNOVATION NEEDS PERMISSION TO FAIL



  Failure is essentially irrelevant unless it is
  catastrophic.294




                       D esigning the O rganization  · 1 1 9
              Failure is essentially irrelevant
                   unless it is catastrophic.




120 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
You have to always look at the incentive structure of an orga-
nization and ask, “Is that organization properly incentivizing
innovation?”295 We’re looking for any possible action that
can improve the probability of success, no matter how small.
Whether that comes from an intern, me, or anyone else doesn’t
matter.296


When trying new things, you’ve got to have some acceptance
of failure…failure must be an option. If failure is not an option,
it’s going to result in extremely conservative choices and you
may get something even worse than lack of innovation—things
may go backward.297


When we had early failures in the SpaceX flights, I didn’t fire
anyone responsible for those particular causes of failure. They
could have made better decisions, but they were smart and
hardworking. It just wouldn’t have been fair in that situation.
Letting people go is only fair if they can’t get themselves moti-
vated around the core mission or they’re really not giving it
everything they can.298


It’s important to create an environment that fosters innovation,
and you want to let it evolve in a Darwinian way. You don’t
want to pick one technology or path and decide that it will
win, because it may not be the best option. Let things evolve.299


With innovation and new technology, you don’t know what
the path is—there’s no map. By nature it’s unknown, which
means you’re going to make false moves. It must be culturally
acceptable to make false moves.300


So to provide support for innovation, make sure the penalty
for failure is low. You don’t want the response to failure to be


                          D esigning the O rganization  · 1 2 1
too punitive. That’s one of the keys to Silicon Valley’s success.
There are many founders who’ve built successful companies
after a previous company failed. They quickly reconstituted.
People left and joined other companies. That’s critical.301


If you punish people too much for failure, then they will
respond accordingly, and the innovation you get will be incre-
mental. Nobody’s going to try anything bold for fear of getting
fired or being punished in some way. If you expect innovation,
the compensation structure must reflect that. The risk-reward
must favor taking bold moves.302


Failure is a side effect of iteration. I once told a discouraged
engineer, “If you can’t tell me the four ways you fucked some-
thing up before you got it right, you weren’t the one doing the
real work.”303




If we’re not occasionally blowing up an engine on
the test stand, we’re not trying hard enough.304



Q: Why is it so hard to predict what will work and what won’t?


We do as much as we can on the ground and in simulations,
but a lot of factors can’t be simulated. A design might work in
simulation or the test stand, but not in a real flight.305 There’s
no test stand that can test a rocket at 17,000 mph, doing six Gs
in every different orientation. It’s not possible.306




122 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
After we fly a mission, hundreds of changes take place. Not
a few. Hundreds. If you go to a detailed level across the ship,
booster, and engines, there might be thousands of changes
between flights. I’m just talking hardware here; software
changes even more.307


Many are small, but a small change could be a big deal. The
first issues you find are fundamental design flaws that would
make success impossible. Some issues vary. They make suc-
cess possible sometimes, but not every time. Maybe a design
will blow up only once in a while. Things that work only some-
times can throw you off. Just because it worked once does not
mean it will work again, because the combination of factors
isn’t the same. It requires a lot of flights to figure out which
issues cause one in ten failures and which cause one in one
hundred failures.308




   You will lose.

   It will hurt the first fifty times.

   When you get used to losing, you will play each
   game with less emotion.309




                          D esigning the O rganization  · 1 2 3
SIMPLICITY WINS



Never use a cruise missile to kill a fly; just use a
flyswatter.310



Every decision we made in early SpaceX designs has been with
simplicity in mind. Simplicity both improves reliability and
reduces cost. Fewer components means fewer components
to buy and fewer components that can go wrong.311


The number of lines of code is not a figure of merit. I consider
a large number of lines of code to be bad, not good. I would
award one point for adding a line of code and two points for
deleting a line of code.312


In general, always pick common sense as your guide. If follow-
ing a “company rule” is obviously ridiculous in a particular
situation, such that it would make for a great Dilbert cartoon,
then the rule should change.313




Simplicity is our mantra. It creates both reliability
and low cost.314




124 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Q: What are the benefits of simplicity at scale?


At Tesla, the Model 3 body line in Fremont was only ever meant
to make five thousand cars a week, and it’s now doing seven
thousand. We achieved that by removing things. We had been
doing a lot of foolish things. We’ve changed some of the designs
and made them simpler and easier to build. Simplicity comes
from hundreds of little changes.


Being able to get 40 percent more output from the same man-
ufacturing line makes a big difference. It also reduces the
marginal cost of production and improves the quality of the
car. This is the result of a ton of hard work by a lot of people.315


For three months I was at the gigafactory trying to help fix
battery production. It’s a lot of little things. I look at every tiny
part of each process and ask, “Is this process necessary?”




                           D esigning the O rganization  · 1 2 5
                    THE BEST PART IS NO PART.
                 THE BEST PRO ESS IS NO PRO ESS.




126 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   The best part is no part. The best process is no
   process.316



For example, a robot would put a car frame on a turntable. The
turntable would rotate and then another robot would pick it
up. The problem was the turntable would sometimes break
down. So, we eliminated the turntable. With a robot-to-robot
handoff, we had one less step, less equipment, and didn’t have
turntable breakage to consider. It’s a lot of this really simple
stuff, but a thousand times.317




   It’s a lot of minimizing things that can go wrong
   and maximizing the efficiency of the simple
   things.318



If you’ve got a whole bunch of separate parts and each of them
has a given tolerance—even if that tolerance is tight, like 0.2
millimeter tolerance—but if you’ve got fifty parts…you have
to multiply the variances together. You’ll end up with a huge
variance between cars. That’s one of the reasons it’s better to
combine parts rather than have more individual parts.


In the Model 3 engineering, there were a lot of right answers
to the wrong questions.319


Fifty different times for fifty different parts, an engineer would
ask, “What’s the best material to make this part out of?” Of


                          D esigning the O rganization  · 1 2 7
course, they would get fifty different answers. They were all
true individually, but not true collectively.


When you try to join all these parts made of dissimilar metals,
there are many issues. You need better sealant to prevent gal-
vanic corrosion. You’ve got to join some with rivets, some with
spot welds, some with resin, or resin and spot welds. Then it
looks like a Frankenstein situation all together.320


It’s way better to have a single piece, casted. Then you have
no gaps, no sealant, no dissimilar metals. You can reduce the
size of the body shop in the factory dramatically. Having the
rear body cast for Model Y allowed us to reduce the body shop
by 30 percent.321


There’s roughly a thousand robots on the Model 3 body line.
Which, by the way, is not a figure of merit. We got rid of three
hundred robots by switching to rear body casting. When we
change the front body to casting, we’ll get rid of another three
hundred robots. You want fewer things, not more.322




It’s easy to say “simplify,” but it’s very difficult to do
it.323




128 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
It’s easy to say                      but it’s very
    ‘simplify’                      difficult to do it




                   D esigning the O rganization  · 1 2 9
THE ALGORITHM



I became a broken record on The Algorithm. But
it’s helpful to say it to an annoying degree.



I have everyone at my companies rigorously implement a five-
step process for engineering. I call it The Algorithm. I’ll list the
steps, then explain. The order is very important.


1. Make your requirements less dumb.
2. Try very hard to delete the part or process.
3. Simplify or optimize.
4. Accelerate.
5. Automate.


Q: Why is the order of the steps so important?




I’ve personally made the mistake of going
backward—on all five steps—multiple times. Many
things at Tesla were automated, accelerated,
simplified, and then deleted.



One example was fiberglass mats on top of the battery pack. At
one point I was basically living on the battery pack production
line, because it was choking the entire car’s production. The
first mistake was trying to fix the automation to make the robot


130 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
better, to make it move faster on a shorter path. We increased
the rate by 20 percent, then 100 percent. Then, we tried to
optimize the use of glue and the drying speed.


Automating was a mistake, then accelerating was a mistake,
then optimizing was a mistake. Finally, I asked the battery
safety team, “What the hell are these mats for? Fire protection?”


They said, “No, they’re for noise and vibration.”


I said, “But…you’re the battery team.”


So I asked the noise vibration analysis team, “What’s the mat
for?”


They said fire safety. It was like being in a Dilbert cartoon. I feel
like I’m in a Dilbert cartoon quite frequently.


So we ran a test: a car with and without the fiberglass mats
and a microphone in both. No one could tell the difference.
So, we deleted the part (the mats), which deleted a step that
required two million dollars of robotics, because it was just a
big pile of nonsense.324


Q: Can you walk me through the steps?


The first step is to question the requirements, and make your
requirements less dumb. You have to start there, because oth-
erwise you could get the perfect answer to the wrong question.
This step makes the question the least wrong possible.


Your requirements are definitely dumb. It does not matter who
gave them to you. Requirements from smart people are the


                            D esigning the O rganization  · 1 3 1
most dangerous, because you’re less likely to question them.
Always question requirements, even if it came from me. Every-
one is wrong some of the time.


Whatever requirements or constraints you do have must
come from a person, not a department. You can’t actually ask
a department. You have to be able to ask a person, and the
person putting forth the requirement must take responsibility
for that requirement. Otherwise, you could have a requirement
made up by an intern two years ago off the cuff, or someone
who isn’t even at the company anymore. You must know the
name of the real person who made every requirement.


Many times we’ve had dumb requirements, dug into them,
and discovered no one currently working in that department
agrees with the requirement. These things are often way more
silly than you think. So step one is make your requirements
less dumb.325


Step two: Try very hard to delete the part or process. It sounds
obvious, but people often forget to try deleting something
entirely.




132 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
If you're not adding deleted things back in 10%
    of the time, you're not deleting enough.




                 D esigning the O rganization  · 1 3 3
If you’re not adding deleted things back in 10 percent of the
time, you’re clearly not deleting enough. Somewhat illogically,
people often feel they’ve succeeded if they are not forced to put
anything back in. But actually they have failed in a different
way, because they’ve been overly conservative and have left
things in there that shouldn’t be.


The bias tends to be very strong for adding this part or process
step “just in case we need it.” But you can make “just in case”
arguments for many, many, many things.


People tend to remember, with sometimes a jarring level of
pain, when they deleted something they later needed. They
overcorrect, and put too much stuff in there, which overcom-
plicates things.


I tell them this in advance: “Look, we’re deliberately going
to delete more than we should. Some of the things we delete,
we’re going to put back in. At least one in ten things, we’re
going to add back in.” People get a little shook by that. But if
you’re so conservative in deleting that you never have to put
anything back in, you obviously have a lot of stuff that isn’t
needed. So, you’ve got to overcorrect for that tendency.


At SpaceX, I would tell the team, “We are on a deletion
rampage!! Nothing is sacred. We will delete any remotely
questionable tubes, sensors, manifolds, etc. tonight. Please
go ultrahardcore on deletion and simplification.” We put
immense effort into reducing mass.


There’s a recursive factor to mass. If you add an extra ton of
heat shielding, you also need more fuel to get it to orbit, and
you need more fuel to deorbit, and you need more fuel to land


134 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
it. Also the structure now has more load on it, because it’s car-
rying an extra ton of heat shield. This applies to any given ton.


Adding each ton is almost like adding two tons when it’s fully
considered. We’ve calculated it to be around a 1.8 recursion
factor, but we’re probably forgetting something that gets us
closer to two. Every one ton of mass begets an extra ton. That
is why it is very important to delete.326


Recapping so far: Step one, make your requirements less dumb.
Step two, try hard to delete the part or process.327


Then, once you have deleted as much as you can, the third step
is to simplify or optimize. The third step. The third step. Not
the first step. Why?




   The most common mistake of smart engineers is to
   optimize a thing that should not exist.




                         D esigning the O rganization  · 1 3 5
     The most common mistake of smart engineers
     is to optimize a thing that should not exist.




136 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Everyone was trained in high school and college to answer the
question in front of them. It’s convergent logic. You can’t tell
the professor, “Your question is dumb.” You have to answer
the question. Without knowing it, almost everyone has this
mental straightjacket on. They’ll work on optimizing a thing
that should simply not exist.


Then, and only then, step four: accelerate cycle time. Once
you’re moving in the right direction, and moving efficiently…
you’re moving too slow. Go faster. You can always make things
go faster.


But, do not go faster until you have worked on the other three
things first. I mistakenly spent a lot of time accelerating pro-
cesses that I later realized should have been deleted. Speeding
up something that shouldn’t exist is absurd. If you’re digging
your grave, don’t dig it faster. Stop digging.


Step five, the final step, is to automate. The big mistake I made
in the Tesla factories in Nevada and Fremont was trying to
automate every step too early. To fix that, we had to tear
hundreds of expensive robots out of the production line. We
put a hole in the side of the building just to remove all that
equipment.328


Always wait until the end of designing a process—after you
have questioned all the requirements and deleted unnecessary
parts—before you introduce automation.329




                          D esigning the O rganization  · 1 3 7
MANIAC AL URGEN CY



 A maniacal sense of urgency is our operating
 principle.330




                            M aniacal U rgency  · 1 39
DON’T WASTE TIME
Excessive meetings are the blight of big companies and almost
always get worse over time. Get rid of all large meetings, unless
you’re certain they are providing value to the whole audience,
in which case, keep them short.


Also get rid of frequent meetings, unless you are dealing with
an extremely urgent matter. Meeting frequency should drop
rapidly once the urgent matter is resolved.


Walk out of a meeting or drop off a call as soon as it is obvious
you aren’t adding value. It is not rude to leave; it is rude to make
someone stay and waste their time.




140 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
SPEED IS BOTH OFFENSE AND DEFENSE



   The only true currency is time.331



The best offense and defense is speed. The SR-71 Blackbird is
a military plane with almost no defense except acceleration.
It was never shot down. Not even once. Over three thousand
missiles were shot at the SR-71 Blackbird and none hit. All it
did was go faster. The power of speed is underappreciated as
a competitive factor.332


The real way you actually achieve intellectual property (IP)
protection is by innovating fast. If your rate of innovation is
high, then you don’t need to worry about protecting the IP
because other companies will be copying something you did
years ago. That’s fine. Just make sure your rate of innovation
is fast. Speed of innovation is what matters.333


We obviously cannot compete with the big car companies in
size, so we must do so with intelligence and agility.334 A fac-
tory moving at twice the speed of another factory is basically
equivalent to two factories. The company will succeed if it can
do with one factory what takes other companies two, three, or
four factories. We try to think, “How can we make each fac-
tory produce what would normally require five or even ten
factories?”335




                                     M aniacal U rgency  · 1 4 1
I have a running triage of what I do at each
company, constantly thinking, “What is the most
useful thing I could do?”336



In early SpaceX, I told the team everything we did was a func-
tion of our burn rate. We were burning through a hundred
thousand dollars per day. In the same way, I expected the rev-
enue in ten years to be ten million dollars a day. Every day we
were slower to achieve our goals was a day of missing out on
that revenue.337


You need to be a vector, not just a scalar. That means you
need to go at high speed in the right direction. No company
will always be going in the right direction all the time—so you
have to do course corrections, like a guided missile.338


I try to work as much as possible—to the edge of sanity. Every
good hour or even minute of thinking about Tesla and SpaceX
has such a big effect on the company. It makes sleeping difficult.


Tesla is getting to the point where every high-quality minute
of thinking has a million-dollar impact. That is insane. If Tesla
is doing $2 billion a week in revenue, that’s about $300 million
a day, seven days a week. There are many instances where a
half-hour meeting improved the company’s financial outcome
by $100 million.339




142 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
DO THINGS IN PARALLEL



  Everything is measured in terms of time. What is
  the time risk associated with something?

  The one thing you cannot replace is time.340




                               M aniacal U rgency  · 1 4 3
        The one thing you cannot replace is time.




144 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
For PayPal, we needed to establish a lot of back-office relation-
ships to attach various data sources. The credit card system for
processing credit cards, the Federal Reserve System for doing
electronic funds transfers, the various fraud databases to run
fraud checks. There was a lot we had to interface with, and it
took a while to set all that up.


But by doing them all in parallel, it all came together simulta-
neously. Developing the software and having it ready for the
general public coincided with us concluding deals with the
outside vendors. All that took about a year.341


Avoid serialized dependencies. A lot of things have a “gesta-
tion period” and there is nothing you can do to accelerate it.
If you can have all those things gestating in parallel, that will
substantially accelerate your overall timeline. People tend to
serialize too much. Put as many gestating elements in parallel
as possible.342




   If a timeline is long, it’s wrong.343




                                     M aniacal U rgency  · 1 4 5
BREAK DOWN THE “IMPOSSIBLE”
The general principles of first-principle thinking apply to soft-
ware, hardware, anything really. Often, we were told something
was impossible, but once we broke it down into its constituent
elements, we could solve those.344


For xAI in 2024, we were trying to build a training supercluster
(a giant network of computers to train an AI model). We went to
the various suppliers and said we needed one hundred thousand
H100s (superpowerful computer chips) to be able to train coher-
ently. Their estimates for how long it would take to complete
that were eighteen to twenty-four months. Well, we needed to
get that done in six months or we wouldn’t be competitive.


So, we broke that down. We need a building; we need power;
we need cooling.


We didn’t have enough time to build a building from scratch.
So, we found a factory in Memphis that was no longer in use.
The input power was 15 megawatts and we needed 150 mega-
watts. So, we rented generators and put them along one side
of the building.


Then, we needed cooling. So, we rented about a quarter of the
mobile cooling capacity of the US and put the chillers on the
other side of the building.


That didn’t fully solve the problem because the power vari-
ations during training are very big. Power can drop by 50
percent in 100 milliseconds, which the generators can’t keep
up with. So then we added Tesla megapacks and modified the
software in the megapacks to be able to smooth out the power
variation during the training run.


146 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Then there were a bunch of networking challenges. Net-
working cables for one hundred thousand GPUs (graphics
processing units) are very, very difficult. We ran the network-
ing team to do the cabling in four shifts, 24/7. I was sleeping in
the data center and doing cabling myself.345


Now called Colossus, it is currently the largest AI training
platform in the world. It was constructed in 122 days. Ninety-
two days later, it had been doubled to two hundred thousand
GPUs.346




                                      M aniacal U rgency  · 1 4 7
SET AGGRESSIVE TIMELINES



I often tell the Tesla team: “It’s okay to scrap
equipment or money. It’s not okay to scrap time.”347



When I was interviewing for a vice president of machining, I
explained I was paying for everything at SpaceX out of pocket.
I asked him, “What’s the cheapest you would work for?” He
haggled, and eventually we agreed. Ten minutes later, I gave
him a contract. This was a Saturday at 5:00 p.m. He started
working that night.348


Q: Do you deliberately make aggressive prediction timelines
to drive people to be ambitious?


For internal timelines, we set the most aggressive timelines we
can. I do this because there’s a kind of “law of gaseous expan-
sion” for schedules. Whatever time you set, it’s not going to be
less than that. It’s rare that something will ever get done faster
than the schedule.349


When I cite a schedule, it is actually the schedule I think is true.
It’s not some fake schedule I made up. It may be delusional—
that is entirely possible, and that has happened from time to
time. But it’s never some knowingly fake deadline, ever.350


I want to emphasize that some dates are not dates that will
actually be met. For example, the initial release date for the
Model 3 at Tesla was an impossible date because there are
seven thousand unique components in the Model 3, and our


148 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
deadline assumed all of them would arrive on time. That won’t
happen. But, it was a date for us to hold ourselves (internally)
and our suppliers to.351




   I do have a habit of being optimistic with schedules.352



When I give estimates about our production, it’s guesswork.
Especially guesses about exponential curves. In exponential
growth, the difference a year or two makes to an outcome is
enormous. We got a lot of criticism for the number of cars we
delivered in 2017. The area under the curve of production in
2017 was quite small because it was the beginning of an expo-
nential ramp, but once that growth got going, the area under
the curve was enormous. That’s why people were so shocked.
I kept trying to say this, but people don’t understand what
exponential means.353


In 2018, we doubled our global fleet, cumulatively. We made
and delivered about as many cars as we had in our entire his-
tory. Most people thought it wasn’t possible. If you predicted
linear growth, it wouldn’t seem possible.


But when making estimates involving exponential growth,
small changes in the calendar breakpoint have enormous per-
centage differences in outcome. The time difference is small,
but the percentage difference in the outcome is enormous.354


As far as our predictions are concerned, the media tends to
report all the wrong ones and ignore all the correct ones. I’ve


                                     M aniacal U rgency  · 1 4 9
had a long career in multiple industries. If you list just my sins,
I sound like the worst person on Earth. But if you put those in
the context of what I’ve done right, it makes much more sense.




I don’t want to blow your mind, but I’m not always
right.355



The longer you do anything, the more mistakes you will make,
cumulatively. If you sum up just the mistakes, it sounds like
I’m the worst predictor ever, which is not the case.


Some of them happen sooner or later, but they do tend to come
true. It’s rare they do not come true eventually. For radical
technology predictions, the point is not that it was a few years
late, but that it happened at all. That’s the more important
part.356




I may be a little optimistic, but I always deliver.357




150 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
WE MUS T MAKE S TUFF



 Manufacturing is underrated. It’s hard.358




                             W e M ust M ake S tuff  · 1 5 1
THE REAL WORK



Some people have an absurd view of the economy
as a magic thing that just produces stuff.



They think goods and services magically come from some-
where, and if somebody has more stuff than somebody else,
it’s because they took more from this magic source of stuff.359


Now, let me break it to the fools out there. If we don’t make
stuff, there’s no stuff. If we don’t grow the food, process the
food, and transport the food…there’s no food. Medical treat-
ments, getting your teeth fixed, everything. There’s no stuff if
we don’t make stuff.


Some people have become detached from reality. This notion
that the government can just send checks out to everybody
and everything will be fine is not true—obviously. You can’t
just legislate money to solve things. If you don’t make stuff,
there is no stuff. The whole machine could grind to a halt.360


Technological progress is not inevitable. It’s not some kind of
abstract concept. Humans make technology. If we don’t do it,
it will not happen.361




Somebody has to do the real work.



152 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
There’s an overallocation of talent in finance and law, espe-
cially in the United States. Too many smart people go into
finance and law. This is both a compliment and a criticism.
We should have fewer people doing law and finance and more
people making stuff.


Manufacturing used to be highly valued in the United States.
These days it hasn’t been as much, which I think is wrong.
Making cars is an honest day’s living, that’s for sure. Making
anything or providing a valuable service like good entertain-
ment, good information—these are valuable things to do.362




   I’ve got mad respect for the makers of things.363




                                  W e M ust M ake S tuff  · 1 5 3
THE FACTORY IS THE PRODUCT



The biggest epiphany I had building Tesla is
what really matters is the machine that builds the
machines—the factory.364



To accelerate a sustainable future, Tesla had to scale up
production volume as quickly as possible. That is why Tesla
engineering transitioned to focus heavily on designing the
machine that makes the machines—turning the factory itself
into the product.


A first-principles physics analysis of automotive produc-
tion suggests that somewhere between a fivefold to tenfold
improvement is achievable by version three on a roughly two-
year iteration cycle.365


Tesla believes strongly in making things. Apple and Google
do not. It’s a philosophical difference. We believe that manu-
facturing technology is itself subject to a tremendous amount
of innovation. In fact, we believe there’s more potential for
innovation in manufacturing than in the design of a car—by
a long shot. This is just a philosophical difference. Perhaps we
are wrong. But we believe in manufacturing, and a company
that values manufacturing as highly as we do will attract the
best minds in manufacturing.366




154 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Our success or failure will not be because of
   competition. It will be our capability to make
   a high-quality product at a price people can
   afford.367



You’ve got this giant factory, a cybernetic collective with ten
thousand things going wrong and you’ve got to solve them
all. Fast. If you don’t solve problems fast enough, the factory
doesn’t go. A big factory burns a huge amount of money every
minute you aren’t making a product.368




                                   W e M ust M ake S tuff  · 1 5 5
ATTACK THE CONSTRAINT



Designing a rocket is trivial.



There are tons of books you can read, and if you can under-
stand equations, you can design a rocket. Real easy. But making
even one of these things and getting it to orbit is very hard.369


It’s the same thing for cars. It’s easy to make a car prototype;
it’s hard to do car production.370


This is underappreciated. People think there is a “eureka”
moment where you come up with an idea and that’s it. They
believe design is the hard part and production is just making
copies. That’s completely false.371


At Tesla, we learned a valuable lesson. The production line will
move as fast as the slowest and least lucky part of the entire
production line. Let’s say there are ten thousand things that
have to go right for production to work. If you have 9,999 things
working and one that isn’t, that sets the production rate.372


Things move as fast as the least lucky or least competent sup-
plier. Any natural disaster you care to name has happened to our
suppliers. A supplier had a factory burn down. An earthquake. A
tsunami. Massive hail. A tornado. A ship sank. A shoot-out at the
Mexican border. I’m not kidding. That delayed trunk carpet.373


So when scaling SpaceX, we spent ten to one hundred times
more effort on designing the manufacturing system than on


156 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
designing the Raptor engine.374 We built the rockets first and
the factory later, because building the production system is
the harder thing.375


Design is overrated, and manufacturing is underrated. There is
1,000 percent, maybe 10,000 percent more work that goes into
the production system than the product itself.376 Especially
for a product with new technology. The difficulty of manu-
facturing is proportionate to the amount of new technology
in the product.377




                                   W e M ust M ake S tuff  · 1 5 7
MANUFACTURING IS THE MOAT
Two things define manufacturing competitiveness: economies
of scale and technology. If you maximize your level of technol-
ogy and maximize your level of scale, this is obviously going
to be the most competitive situation. That’s why plants are so
freaking giant.378


Our plant in Texas starts from actual rail cars of raw materials
coming in. We form the battery cell and the battery pack, build
the motor, and cast the parts. We also have introduced a major
innovation, which is to cast the entire front third and rear
third of the car as a single piece. I got this idea from toy cars.


I wondered, “Toys are cheap! How do they make toys?”


“They just cast them.”


I was like, “Well, can you build a casting machine big enough
for a car?”


They said, “No one ever has.”


“Are we breaking any laws of physics?”


“No…”


“Well, let’s just ask them.”


There were six major casting machine suppliers in the world
at the time. Five of them said no and the sixth said maybe. I
said, “I’ll take that as a yes.”379




158 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Prototypes are easy and fun. Reaching volume
production with a reliable product at an affordable
price is excruciatingly difficult.380




                           W e M ust M ake S tuff  · 1 5 9
      PART III




BUILDING
COMPANIES
Q: What fuels your creativity?




Pressure. Necessity.381




162 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BECOMIN G A
F OUNDER



   You want to embark on something where success is
   certain to be one of the possible outcomes.382



Q: What was the path to starting your first company?


Growing up in South Africa, it seemed like a lot of the advanced
technology was being produced in America and Silicon Valley,
especially. I wanted to go where I could be involved in the cre-
ation of new technology. That’s what took me first to Canada
(because I could get citizenship in Canada through my mom)
and then ultimately to the US.383


When I was seventeen, I got my Canadian passport. Three
weeks later I was in Canada.384 I left South Africa and landed
in Montreal. I arrived with a backpack, a suitcase of books,
and $2,000.


                                  B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 63
I stayed in a youth hostel for a few days, then bought a bus
ticket for one hundred bucks to go across the country, making
stops along the way.385


I managed to get to Swift Current in Saskatchewan. My cousin’s
son had a wheat farm where I worked for about six weeks, as I
turned eighteen. We did a barn raising, cleared out the wheat
bins and grain silos, and worked the vegetable patch.386


Then I got back on the bus and went to Vancouver. I had a
half-uncle there in the lumber industry. I ended up working
at a lumber mill chainsawing logs and cleaning out the pulp
boiler. That might be the hardest job I’ve had. You had to crawl
through this little tunnel in a hazmat suit and then shovel this
steaming sand and mush out of the boilers to clean them out.
There’s only one entrance or exit, a little tunnel. If you’re claus-
trophobic, it would be real bad. It did not seem safe. But it was
the highest-paying job at the employment office. Other jobs
were under eight dollars an hour, and this one was eighteen
dollars an hour.387


I worked there as a lumberjack doing odd jobs for a few months.
Then I applied for college, and went to Queen’s University in
Kingston. I was there for a couple years before applying to
UPenn. I didn’t think I’d be able to go because I was paying my
own way through university. That’s not too hard in Canada
because tuition is highly subsidized, but in the US college is
more expensive.388




164 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   I paid my own way through college and dropped
   out of Stanford grad school with $110K in college
   debt.389



Physics and computer science were always my two best sub-
jects, because I wanted to figure out the nature of the universe.
I thought I might do physics at a particle accelerator, banging
particles together to see what happens in a research facility.
Then, the supercollider got canceled in the US, and I realized
I could study for years to work at a collider, and then the gov-
ernment could arbitrarily cancel it. Decision made: I could
not do that.390


Q: How did you decide to leave your PhD program and start
your first company?


Because of my interest in electric cars as a college student,
I took an internship at a company that made high-energy-
density capacitors. My intent was to get a PhD in energy
storage solutions for electric vehicles. I was going to Stanford
to study material science and the physics of high-energy-
density capacitors for use in electric vehicles.391


But, I wasn’t sure if my work during that PhD would actually
be useful. I was concerned it could be academically useful but
not practically useful.392


Success on an academic level would have been quite likely. I
could publish a paper, but most papers are pretty useless.393
Once in a while you get something spectacular but it’s pretty
rare.394 How many PhD papers are actually used by someone,


                                   B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 65
ever? Percentagewise, not many. You add a leaf to the tree of
knowledge, but that leaf could be saying, Nope, not possible.
This is not good enough technology to be used in an electric
vehicle. There goes seven years of my life.395


Not that I cared about the PhD, actually. I just needed a lab. I
could spend years working in a lab and maybe the technology
would work…or maybe it wouldn’t.396




I was not sure success was even a possibility. I
thought maybe it was, but I wasn’t sure.397



Then the internet started taking off. It was clear to me the
internet was happening in 1995, although most people weren’t
aware of it then.398 I was pretty sure success was one of the
possible outcomes for an internet company. I knew watching
the internet get built while doing a PhD would be frustrating.399
I decided to put graduate school on hold and start an internet
company.400


I thought I’d be able to come back to electric vehicles. I
figured electric vehicle technology and energy storage tech-
nology would have a natural progression, and that ended up
happening.


In 1995, it was not obvious you could make any money on
the internet. Until Netscape went public in late 1995, nobody
thought you could make a valuable internet company. Now it
seems obvious. But back then, it was not at all.


166 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Humanity was effectively becoming a superorganism, qual-
itatively different from what it had been before. I wanted to
be part of that. I wanted to help build humanity’s nervous
system.401


The internet turned out to be a good idea for my first company
because software is a low-capital endeavor. I didn’t have any
money, and had a bunch of student debt. You don’t need a lot
of tooling and equipment to get started. Software you can just
write by yourself. It’s not capital intensive. Starting something
software-related as your first company is much, much easier.402




                                   B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 67
STARTING ZIP2



When we first started Zip2, our ambitions were
quite low: make enough money to pay rent.403



Q: When did you start your first company?


Starting a company was not actually the first thing I tried. I
tried to get a job at Netscape, but they didn’t reply to my emails.
So I went to hang out in the lobby at Netscape. I didn’t know
who to talk to, and I was too shy to talk to anyone. I figured, “If
I can’t get a job, I’ll just try writing my own software.”404


It wasn’t actually from the desire to start a company. I just
wanted to be part of building the internet in some way. Since
I couldn’t get a job at an internet company, I had to start one
myself.405


I wanted to try to build something useful, but I didn’t think
I would build anything particularly great. Probabilistically,
greatness seemed unlikely, but I wanted to at least try.406


We started off building maps, directions, and classified ads.
It was, to the best of my knowledge, the first map and direc-
tions on the internet. There may still be some patents—or
maybe they lapsed at this point. (Note from Eric: there is,
patent #5944769.407) The whole initial code base I wrote myself
because there wasn’t anyone else. It was just me.408




168 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
I was twenty-four at the time and only had a few thousand
dollars saved. I convinced my brother to join, and he brought
about five thousand dollars, which was a lot for us. For the
first few months, we only had one computer. When the web-
site wasn’t working, it was because I was compiling code. The
website was up during the day; I was coding at night, seven
days a week, all the time. We more or less squatted in the
office because the landlord was always out of the country, and
nobody was using it.409


Soon, there were six of us. Me, my brother, a friend of my
mom’s, and three salespeople we hired on contingency by
putting an ad in the newspaper.410


Things were pretty tough in the early going. I didn’t have any
money. In fact, I had negative money because of a huge student
debt. I couldn’t afford an apartment and an office, so I rented
an office because that was cheaper. I slept on the futon at the
office and showered at the YMCA. I briefly had a girlfriend in
that period and to stay with me, she had to sleep in the office.
I was in the best shape—every day a workout, shower, and
you’re good to go!411


There was a small internet service provider on the floor below
us, so we drilled a hole through the floor and connected a
modem cable. That got us our internet connection for one
hundred bucks a month. We had a tiny revenue stream, but
an absurdly tiny burn rate. We actually had more revenue than
we had expenses. When we talked to VCs (venture capitalists),
we could say we were profitable.412




                                  B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 69
Most venture capitalists wouldn’t take a meeting
with us, though.

They said, “Who’s made money on the internet?
No one. Okay, pass.”413



There was a lot more interest in the internet following the
Netscape IPO (initial public offering). Our software was more
impressive by then, too. Mohr Davidow Ventures (a VC firm)
invested $3 million for 60 percent of the company, which we
thought was crazy. They’re going to give us money for nothing?
They must be mad. It seemed insane to give us so much money
for a company that consisted of six people at the time. But it
worked out well for them.414


Q: How did the original idea for Zip2 come about?


We needed to build something that would earn money quickly.
We thought the media industry would need help converting
their content from print to electronic, and they clearly had
money. If we could help them move to the internet, maybe we
could generate revenue. There was no advertising revenue on
the internet at the time. That was the basis of Zip2.415


We hired a lot more people and wrote software to bring news-
papers online. Knight Ridder, New York Times Company, and
Hearst all became investors and customers. And at one point,
Zip2 was responsible for a significant section of the New York
Times Company website. I got to know the media industry
well.416


170 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The challenge was too much control by the existing media
companies. They had too many board seats and too much
voting control over Zip2. They kept trying to push the com-
pany in directions that made no sense. We actually had good
software—comparable to Yahoo! or Excite at the time. It was
all being forced through media companies, who would not
fully use it. We built the best technology, but it wasn’t being
deployed properly.417




   It’s a bit like building F-22 fighter jets and selling
   them to people who roll them down the hill at each
   other. Not the way to use the technology!418



That’s when I realized you want to sell your products straight
to the end consumer. If you’ve got great technology, go directly
to the end consumer. Don’t sell it to some bonehead legacy
company that doesn’t understand how to use it.419


Fortunately, Compaq came along.420 We had the opportunity
to sell Zip2 to Compaq in early 1999 and accepted that offer.
It was a little over $300 million in cash. Cash is a currency I
highly recommend.421


To this day, that moment astonishes me. At the time I was living
in a house with four housemates. Literally, a check came in
my mailbox. I was like, “This is insane. What if somebody…?
I mean, I guess they’d have trouble cashing it?” Seems like a
weird way to send money. My bank account went from $5,000
to $21,005,000.422


                                   B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 7 1
Immediately after the sale, I didn’t take any time off. I still had
to pay taxes, then I ended up putting almost all of that into
X.com (which became PayPal). This was early 1999, and there
were a lot of opportunities remaining on the internet.423




I’ve always wanted to push my chips back on the
table or play the next level of the game. I’m not
good at sitting back.424




172 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
GOING ALL IN, AGAIN (ZIP2 EARNINGS INTO PAYPAL)



   It was frustrating.



We built incredible technology at Zip2, and it had not been
used. I wanted to build another internet company to show
technology can be extremely effective when used properly.425


I felt like we had our wings clipped somewhat with Zip2. I
wanted to avoid being constrained by our customers like that,
and go direct-to-consumer. That’s what motivated me to start
PayPal.426


Q: How did you come up with the idea for PayPal?


I thought, What was essentially digital? What exists in the form
of information, but is not high bandwidth? In 1999, most people
still had modems, so video was not really feasible. Money is
low bandwidth and mostly digital. What can we do to make
money work better?427


Money is like a database for guiding people to decide what they
should do. You can think of banks as a set of databases.428


The 1990s financial infrastructure was a bunch of ancient
mainframes, running ancient code, doing batch processing
with poor security, and a series of heterogeneous databases.
A herky-jerky frickin’ monstrosity.




                                   B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 7 3
From an information theory standpoint, finance would be
much better if it could be real-time, secure, and fast. Essen-
tially just one real-time database. Let’s try to build that.


Q: Can you explain the PayPal idea from an information
theory perspective?


Think of money as information. People often think money has
power in and of itself. It does not. Money is just information.
Money is a database for resource allocation across time and
space.


Let’s try thinking in the limit, as I explained before. If you are
stranded on a tropical island with a trillion dollars, it’s useless.
On the island there are no resources to allocate, except your-
self, so money doesn’t help. If you’re stranded with no food, all
the Bitcoin in the world will not stop you from starving.


You need something to create ratios of value between products
and services. In an economy, you have a massive number of
products and services. You can’t trade for everything. That
would be extremely unwieldy. You need something to create
the ratio of exchange between goods and services. You also
need something that allows us to shift obligations across time,
like debt and equity.429


The quality of money as a system is a function of different
variables. Just like an internet connection, you want high
bandwidth, low latency, and few errors.430


What PayPal really did was help improve the bandwidth—the
speed at which money could move. Instead of mailing checks
back and forth, you could do real-time exchange of money


174 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
online. Sellers could then ship items immediately instead of
waiting for a check and then for the bank to clear it.431




   We should look at currencies from an information
   theory standpoint.

   Whichever has least error and latency will win.



That’s what X.com originally was. I thought we should try to
do all the financial things as well—not just payments. I still
think that’s what PayPal should have done, but whatever. It’s
water under the bridge at this point.432


I rolled most of my Zip2 money into X.com, investing $12.5 mil-
lion.433 In 1999, Sequoia invested in X.com, buying $5 million
in shares, and Mike Moritz joined the company’s board. When
Moritz invested, he said we should hire a CEO. I said, “Great, I
don’t want to be CEO.” I had no desire to be a CEO. It’s a lot of
chores…being CEO sucks. He also told me, “Dude, you should
not invest basically everything except your house and car in
your startup. ”434




   I kept the chips on the table.435




                                   B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 7 5
LISTEN WELL, CORRECT FAST
The initial thought with X.com was to create a conglomera-
tion of financial services, so you have one place where all your
financial service needs could be seamlessly integrated and
work smoothly.


We had a little feature: payments through email. When we
showed the system to someone, we’d show the hard part
first: the conglomeration of financial services. Nobody was
interested.


Then we showed people email payments, which were relatively
easy to build, and everybody was interested. So, we focused
on email payments. That’s what really got PayPal to take off.


It’s important to take feedback from your environment. If we
hadn’t responded to what people said, we probably would not
have been successful. It’s important to look for things like that,
focus on them, and correct your prior assumptions. You want
to close those loops as quickly and clearly as possible.436


I’m trying to create an accurate mental model of reality. If
I have a wrong view on something, or if there’s a nuanced
improvement that can be made, I say, “I used to think this,
which turned out to be wrong—thank goodness I don’t have
that wrong belief anymore.”437




I’m a huge believer in taking feedback.




176 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
We took a similar approach with PayPal that worked at Zip2,
which was to have a small group of very talented people, and
keep it small. PayPal had maybe thirty engineers for a system
which I would say is more sophisticated than the Federal
Reserve clearing system.


Both Zip2 and PayPal operated like Silicon Valley startups.
Pretty flat hierarchy, everybody had a similar desk, and anyone
could talk to anyone.


We had a philosophy of “best idea wins” as opposed to the
person proposing the idea winning because of who they are.
Even though there were times when I thought that should have
been the way to go. Everyone was an equity stakeholder.438


If there were two options, and one wasn’t obviously better than
the other, rather than spend time trying to pick which one was
slightly better, we would just pick one and go. Sometimes we
were wrong and picked the suboptimal path, but at least we
moved fast.439




   Better to pick a path and keep moving than just
   vacillate endlessly on a decision.




                                  B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 7 7
        Better to pick a path and keep moving than
          just vacillate endlessly on a decision.




178 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
We were focused on building the best product we possibly
could. Both Zip2 and PayPal were product-focused compa-
nies. We didn’t worry too much about intellectual property
paperwork. We were incredibly obsessive about building the
best possible customer experience. That was a far more effec-
tive selling tool than having a giant sales force or marketing
gimmicks.440




   Pay close attention to negative feedback, and
   solicit it, particularly from friends. It’s incredibly
   helpful.

   This may sound like simple advice, but hardly
   anyone does it.441




                                 B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 7 9
         Pay close attention to negative feedback,
         and solicit it, particularly from friends.
                  It's incredibly helpful.




180 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
UNITE AND CONQUER



   What matters to me is winning, and not in a small
   way.442



Around the same time I was starting X, another company
formed called Confinity, which was Peter Thiel, Max Levchin,
Luke Nosek, David Sacks, Ken Howery, etc. At X.com, we had
Jeremy Stoppelman, who created Yelp, and Roelof Botha, who
went on to run Sequoia. Both companies had a crazy amount
of talent.


Confinity started as a PalmPilot cryptography company, back
when you could communicate through the infrared port of a
PalmPilot. Then they evolved in the direction of payments as
well. We were both in Palo Alto, a block away from each other—
at one point, even in the same building. We were competing
with each other like maniacs.


Finally, we had coffee on University Avenue and said, “Hey,
why don’t we just combine our efforts? Otherwise we’re gonna
bludgeon each other to death.” We knew we had to get that deal
done fast or we were both gonna die.


So we merged Confinity with X.com and raised $100 million
in three weeks during March of 2000.443 About a year later, we
changed the company name to the product name, PayPal.444




                                  B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 81
We went from starting a company to fourteen
months later merging and having a valuation of
$500 million in March of 2000. It felt so sudden,
like, “This is completely ridiculous.”445



In April 2000, the market went into freefall.446 The challenge
was keeping the company alive for the next two years.447


There was a lot of drama; it was a turbulent period. I didn’t
expect PayPal’s growth rate to be what it was, and that cre-
ated major problems. After the first month of the website
being active, we had one hundred thousand customers. It was
nutty.448 We definitely did not anticipate that.449


Q: What made PayPal’s growth rate so dramatic?


PayPal was a perfect case for viral marketing. Like Hotmail,
one customer would be like a salesperson for you, bringing
other customers. Customers would send money to a friend and
bring that friend into the network. We had this exponential
growth, where the more customers we had, the faster it grew.
It was like bacteria in a petri dish, following an S-curve.450


We started off first by offering people twenty dollars if they
opened an account and twenty dollars if they referred anyone.
Then we dropped it to ten dollars. Then we dropped it to five
dollars. As the network got bigger and bigger, the value of the
network itself exceeded any sort of carrot that we could offer.451
We probably spent $60 or $70 million in incentives to build
that network. That seems like a lot, but it built a very valu-


182 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
able network. The relative cost depends on your scale. That’s
a peanut to Google.452


Q: Leading through that kind of growth seems very challeng-
ing. How did you manage it all?


I ran PayPal for about the first two years of its existence. We
launched after year one, and by the end of year two we had
a million customers. It gives you a sense for how fast things
can grow. We didn’t have a sales force, VP of sales, or VP of
marketing and we didn’t spend any money on advertising.453


It wasn’t easy, because we still had some bugs in the software.
Even if the bug only occurs one in one thousand times, that’s
still a thousand angry customers shouting, “Where is my
money!?”


We had a customer service office on University Avenue in Palo
Alto with five people. When something went wrong, customer
service phones would explode. We had many challenges. Vari-
ous financial regulatory agencies were trying to shut us down.
The FTC was trying to shut us down. Visa, MasterCard, and
eBay were all trying to have us shut down. There were a lot
of battles.454




   It was a close call. We came close to dying in
   2000 and 2001.455




                                  B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 83
FROM EXILE TO EXIT



I was away for two weeks and the management
team decided I wasn’t the right guy to run the
company.

Instead of fighting during a critical time, I thought it
was best to concede.456



It’s not a good idea to leave the office when there are a lot of
major things underway that are causing people a great deal of
stress. I left for a trip, a combination of needing to raise money
and I had gotten married earlier that year and had not had a
vacation or honeymoon. It was kind of a combined financing
trip and honeymoon. Also not a great idea.


I got removed as CEO of PayPal because I wanted to do a bunch
of things that seemed extremely risky. I think they would have
worked out, but at a time when companies were dropping like
flies, I was proposing we do all these things that sound risky—
it was much too scary for the rest of the team.457


I didn’t agree with their conclusion, but I understood why they
took the action they did. Peter, Max, David, and the other guys
are smart people with the right motivations. They did what
they thought was right, for the right reasons. The reasons
weren’t valid in my opinion but it’s hard to argue with the
ultimate outcome, which was positive.




184 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
It would be easy to be bitter and hate them forever, but the
better course of action is to turn the other cheek. I put a lot of
effort into making things good between us, and they became
good. I invested in some of Peter’s companies, including Found-
ers Fund, which is made up primarily of former PayPal people.
Peter, who replaced me as CEO, later invested in SpaceX.458




   Life is too short for long-term grudges.459



Q: What was the exit like?


In about February of 2002, PayPal went public. I think we were
the only internet company to go public in the first part of 2002.
It went reasonably well, although I can imagine we set a record
on SEC rewrites. This was right around the time of Enron and
other corporate scandals, so they put us through the wringer.460


It was a tough, long-running battle between PayPal and eBay’s
payment system, and it was certainly challenging. There were
times it felt like trying to win a land war in Asia. They got to
set the ground rules. It was like trying to beat Microsoft inside
their own operating system. It took a lot of effort to beat eBay
in their own system. One of the long-term risks for PayPal was
eBay would one day prevail. One way to retire that risk was to
sell to eBay.461


In October 2002, we struck a deal to sell PayPal to eBay for
about $4.5 billion.462



                                   B ecoming a F ounder  · 1 85
I could go and buy one of the islands of the
Bahamas and turn it into my personal fiefdom, but
I am much more interested in trying to build and
create a new company.

I haven’t spent my winnings.

I’m going to put almost all of it back into a new
game.463




186 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BUILDIN G TESL A



 Accelerating the removal of hydrocarbons from the
 crust and placing them in the atmosphere is unwise.
 This is one of the biggest problems of the twenty-
 first century.

 Hopefully this transition to sustainable energy
 occurs before it’s too late.464




                                  B uilding T esla  · 1 87
THE MISSION TO PROTECT THE PLANET



There’s no way we can conserve our way
to a good future. We have to make energy
sustainable.465



Q: Why is the mission of Tesla so important to you?


The overarching purpose of Tesla is to help expedite the move
from a mine-and-burn hydrocarbon economy toward a solar-
electric economy, which I believe to be the primary, but not
exclusive, sustainable solution.466


Energy output is the foundation of the economy, just like
sunlight is the foundation of the ecosystem. To a first approx-
imation, a country’s goods and services production will be
proportionate to its energy output.467


By definition, we must at some point achieve a sustainable
energy economy or we will run out of fossil fuels to burn and
civilization will collapse. Given that we must get off fossil fuels
anyway, and that virtually all scientists agree dramatically
increasing atmospheric and oceanic carbon levels is insane…
the faster we achieve sustainability, the better.468


I don’t have any fundamental dislike of hydrocarbons. I simply
look at the future and say, “What is the thing that will actually
work?” Using a nonrenewable resource obviously will not work.469


There are time extensions on the game, but the game is going


188 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
to end eventually. That should be obvious. If we rely on non-
renewables, it’s like we’re stuck in a room where the oxygen
is gradually depleting. We want to get out of that room. The
sooner we get out of that room, the better.470


Q: How do you respond to people who don’t see the problem
with extraction?


It is dangerous to be extracting vast quantities of hydrocarbons
from deep within the earth and putting them in the atmo-
sphere. Sooner or later, something bad will happen. There
are a lot of people, particularly in the US, who are vehemently
against electric cars and sustainable energy. It’s quite difficult
to reason with them.


They’ll say, “Well, some scientists don’t think climate change
is a problem.”471




   You can find some small number of people that will
   disagree with anything.



This reminds me of the tobacco industry. For the longest time
you’d see ads where they claimed tobacco was healthy for you.
It’s hard to believe these days, but it’s true.


There were reports where there seemed to be a correlation
between lung cancer and smoking, but tobacco companies
would say, “Our scientists have conducted experiments and
they show no relation at all!” It’s complete nonsense.472


                                           B uilding T esla  · 1 89
Almost any reasonable scientist would say, “Yes, of course
smoking causes lung cancer and all sorts of other bad things.
Not definitively but it’s extremely likely.” Yet the tobacco indus-
try would still say, “Scientists disagree!” because 1 or 2 percent
of the scientific community didn’t feel that way.


The public just hears “Scientists disagree!” rather than “99
percent of scientists think the other 1 percent are stupid.”473


The question isn’t, “Can you prove we’re making the planet
warmer?” but, “Can you prove we’re not?” And you can’t.474


It makes me mad when smart, ethical scientists are accused of
publishing climate papers for “grant money.” They earn pea-
nuts compared to their other opportunities and give that up
to help the world. But their accusers earn billions by slowing
down the growth of clean energy. Who is more credible?475




People often believe things inversely proportional
to the evidence. It’s so strange.

Given a set of possible explanations, why pick the
extremely unlikely one?476



Q: So it’s not too late to turn things around?


Humanity will solve sustainable energy if we continue to
push hard. The future is bright for cheap, abundant energy.
It will be possible to use that energy to pull carbon out of the


190 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
atmosphere. It takes a lot of energy to do that carbon capture,
because putting it into the atmosphere releases energy. To pull
it out, you need to use a lot of energy.


But if we’ve got a lot of sustainable energy from wind and solar,
we can sequester carbon. We can reverse the CO2 parts per
million of the atmosphere and oceans and restore the climate.477




   I donated $100 million to a prize for the best
   carbon capture technology.



We can create as much fresh water as we want. Earth is mostly
water. We should call Earth “Water.” It’s 70 percent water by
surface area. We just happen to be on the small bit that’s land.
With energy, we can turn ocean water into fresh water or irri-
gation water at low cost.478


When you burn fossil fuels, there’s all these side reactions and
toxic gasses of various kinds. A lot of little particulates that are
bad for your lungs. All sorts of bad things are happening, which
will go away with sustainable energy. The sky will be cleaner
and quieter. The future is going to be good.479


The purpose of Tesla was, and remains, accelerating the use of
sustainable energy, so we can imagine far into the future and
life is still good. That’s what “sustainable” means. It’s not some
silly hippie thing—it matters for everyone.480




                                             B uilding T esla  · 1 91
GOING ALL IN, AGAIN (PAYPAL EARNINGS INTO TESLA)



When you have a big technology change, it tends
to come from new companies.481


A lot of entrepreneurial talent and financing goes to the inter-
net. Other sectors like automotive, solar, and space don’t see
new entrants. Not a lot of entrepreneurs go into those areas,
and not a lot of capital goes into those startups.482


This is a problem because innovation tends to come from new
entrants to an industry. This is Schumpeter’s idea of creative
destruction. In an oligopoly, no one is forced to innovate.483
New entrants drive innovation more than anything, which is
why I have devoted my efforts to building new companies in
those industries.484


These industries require quite a bit of capital to get going.
My proceeds from PayPal after tax were about $180 million.
I thought I would allocate half to SpaceX, Tesla, and SolarCity.
I thought that should be fine. I’d have $90 million left, and
that’s…a lot, you know?485


But things cost more and took longer than I thought.486 Each
one ended up costing double what I expected. I thought SpaceX
would need $50 million. Tesla, I thought, would need $25 mil-
lion, maybe $30 million. SolarCity…actually went really well.487


I ended up putting $10 million into Solar City, $70 million into
Tesla, and $100 million into SpaceX. I literally had to borrow
money for rent. It was a close call.488


192 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BUILDING THE FIRST PROTOTYPE
I first realized all vehicles would be electric in the early nine-
ties, way before Tesla started. I was studying physics in my
sophomore year in college; it was obvious to me even then.489


Getting the timing right was important. Lithium-ion batteries
were the critical breakthrough needed for compelling electric
cars. I knew it became possible to start Tesla because we went
from the energy density of lead acid batteries to lithium-ion
batteries—about a 4x energy density improvement. If you had
a sixty-mile range with a lead-acid battery, you would have
about one-hundred-forty-mile range with lithium-ion for the
same weight.


A company called AC Propulsion had built a prototype, which
had similar specs to what we eventually brought to market as
the first Tesla Roadster. It was cool to see it in action, working.
I tried hard to convince those guys to commercialize their car
but they just did not want to do it.


The car they wanted to make was like an electric Scion. I told
them, “You guys, nobody’s gonna pay $70,000 for an electric
Scion. This is not gonna work. You will sell like fourteen of
these things.”


Though I also said, “Even though I think this is the dumbest
idea ever, I will fund one tenth of it if you can find nine other
people.”490


I thought it would fail, but at least it was something. They
didn’t actually get it off the ground. Eventually I said, “If you
guys are not going to commercialize this, do you mind if I do?”491



                                           B uilding T esla  · 1 93
We made so many mistakes in the beginning
of Tesla. Almost every decision we made was
wrong.492



The founding principles of Tesla were basically completely
wrong. The premise was, “It’s not gonna be that hard! We’ll
take the Lotus Elise, a nice lightweight car, and we’ll take AC
Propulsion’s drive unit technology, put ’er together, and we’ll
have an electric car! It’ll be great!”


Except the AC Propulsion technology could not be industri-
alized. It was handcrafted electronics. In hot or cold weather,
it would respond differently or not at all. It was impossible to
scale this technology. You could only have finicky, individually
made, superexpensive prototypes.


I remember in the early days giving a test ride to Larry Page
and Sergey Brin, whom I’ve known for a long time. There was
some bug in the system and, damn it, the car would only go
ten miles an hour. I was in the passenger seat saying, “Guys, I
swear, it goes a lot faster than this.”


They were kind enough to put a little investment into the com-
pany, despite the world’s worst demo.493


It was just a flat-out burning dumpster fire of stupidity. One
example: The chassis had to be redesigned to fit the battery
pack and became 40 percent heavier. This invalidated the
crash testing Lotus had done.494



194 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
We ended up using none of the AC Propulsion technology.
Something that looks cool and works as an individual proto-
type does not necessarily scale. Eventually maybe 7 percent
of the parts of the original Tesla Roadster were common with
the Lotus Elise. It would have been much smarter to start with
a clean-sheet design and not try to modify something else.495


I was going to start an electric vehicle (EV) company with JB
Straubel based on the AC Propulsion prototype. When I asked
AC Propulsion if it was okay to do that, they said, “There are
some other people who want to create an EV company; would
you like to join forces with them?” I said, “OK.” That was a huge
mistake. JB and I should have just started the company our-
selves. My default inclination is to start things from scratch,
even more so after this experience.496




   The most important thing is to start somewhere, be
   prepared to question your assumptions, fix what
   you did wrong, and adapt to reality.497




                                          B uilding T esla  · 1 95
                           ?




    The most important thing is to start somewhere,
     be prepared to question your assumptions, fix
       what you did wrong, and adapt to reality.




196 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BECOMING TESLA’S CEO
The actual error was me trying to have my cake and eat it too:
I just wanted to work on the technology and the product. I
thought someone else could be the CEO and run the busi-
ness, because I just like working on technology, product, and
design. I was also doing SpaceX at the time, and our rockets
were exploding.


I had always wanted to build an electric car company. I thought
this is how I could have my cake and eat it too. That was a huge
mistake and fundamentally a moral error. When I joined, there
were no employees. There was no intellectual property. There
was no prototype, no nothing.498


I had provided about 95 percent of the money for Tesla, so I
could become CEO anytime I wanted. And in the end, I had to
frickin’ become CEO of Tesla. I didn’t want to be, but it was
either that or the company was going to die.499




   I never wanted to be a CEO, but I learned you
   could not truly be the chief technology or product
   officer unless you were the CEO.500



Being CEO of two startups at the same time was not appealing.
It shouldn’t be appealing, by the way, for anyone thinking it
was a good idea. It was a terrible idea.501


If you’re a CEO of a company, the chore level is high, and if you
don’t do your chores then the company goes to hell. Frankly,


                                          B uilding T esla  · 1 97
I hate doing chores—who doesn’t? There’s a whole bunch of
personnel and legal issues: things I don’t find enjoyable to work
on, but if I don’t work on them, the company suffers. The sheer
volume of work is insane.502


The perception of me as a businessperson is fine, but my time
is spent almost entirely with the engineering team. I’m a phys-
ics guy, an engineer. I’d prefer to be working on products. I do
the business stuff because you have to do the business stuff. If
you don’t do the business stuff, somebody else could do it for
you and then you could be in trouble.503




I have a habit of biting off more than I can chew
and just sitting there with chipmunk cheeks.504




198 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
SEQUENCED STRATEGY OF TESLA
Tesla is focused on making electric cars more affordable, which
is tough. You need high volume to make cars affordable. When
we started, other car companies made a lot more cars, so they
got much better economies of scale. As we build more cars in
higher volume, we make electric cars available to a wider range
of people at lower cost.505


The first version of a product has both a new-technology
problem and a low-volume problem. You want to make your
mistakes at a small scale, work the bugs out of the system, then
reach for scale.506


With a new product, the first thing engineers try to do is make
it work. After you make it work, then you optimize and opti-
mize and optimize.507


The master plan was:


1. Build a sports car.
2. Use that money to build an affordable car.
3. Use that money to build an even more affordable car.


(While doing above, also provide zero-emission electric power
generation options.)508


We had to start off with step one, because it was all I could
afford with what I made from PayPal. I thought our chances
of success were so low, I didn’t want to risk anyone’s funds but
my own in the beginning.509


The list of successful car startups is short. The number of
American car companies that haven’t gone bankrupt is a grand


                                          B uilding T esla  · 1 99
total of two: Ford and Tesla. Starting a car company is idiotic,
and an electric car company is idiocy squared.510




The idea is to drive to mass market as rapidly as
possible, at the pace technology matures.511



As a little startup building a car, there was no way we could
afford a giant plant to make hundreds of thousands of cars a
year. That’s the kind of volume you need to make cheap cars,
and that plant would cost a billion dollars we didn’t have.


Our first car was a sports car, not because we think the world
lacks a sports car, but because it was the right entry point for
the market. If you have a new technology, the right place to
enter is high unit-cost, low unit-volume.512


A low-volume car means a much smaller, simpler factory with
most things done by hand. Without economies of scale, any-
thing we built would be expensive whether it was an economy
sedan or a sports car. Some people would be prepared to pay
a high price for a sports car. No one would pay $100K for an
electric Honda Civic, no matter how cool it looked.513


When a new cell phone or a new laptop comes out, they tend
to be expensive at first, because they’re figuring out the issues
and it takes time to optimize. Over time, with scale, that new
technology becomes cheaper and cheaper.514




200 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
That is the unique and important thing Tesla accomplished.
It is not the design of an electric vehicle, an electric vehicle
prototype, or even low-volume production of a car. The hard
part is not creating a prototype or going into limited produc-
tion. There have been hundreds of car startups over the years
that got that far.515


The difficult thing—which has not been accomplished by an
American car company in one hundred years—is reaching
volume production without going bankrupt. That is the actual
hard thing. The last American car company to reach volume
production without going bankrupt was Chrysler. That was
in the 1920s.516




                                         B uilding T esla  · 2 0 1
KEEPING TESLA ALIVE



Tesla is alive by the skin of its teeth. So is SpaceX.
If things had gone a little bit the other way, both
companies would be dead.



Man, this was grim. I thought this was going to turn into a tale
of warning for hubris.517


In 2008, SolarCity made a deal with Morgan Stanley, and
Morgan Stanley had to renege on the deal because they them-
selves were running out of money. For a while it looked like all
three companies were going to die. I was also going through a
divorce. In addition to all that, I was getting dumped on, mas-
sively, in the press. That was definitely a low point.518


In the midst of this, I faced one of the most difficult choices
of my whole life. Tesla and SpaceX were both on the brink of
bankruptcy.


I had maybe $30 million or $40 million left. I had two choices:
I could put it all into one company, and the other would defi-
nitely die. I could split it between Tesla and SpaceX—but if I
split it between the two, they both might die.


When you put your blood, sweat, and tears into creating some-
thing, building something important—it’s like a child.




202 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Which one will I let starve to death?

   I couldn’t bring myself to do it.

   So, I split the money between the two.519



Trying to raise money for a startup electric car company in
2008 while GM was going bankrupt was difficult, to say the
least. Eventually a subset of the previous investors came in,
which included Antonio Gracias, Steve Jurvetson, and Aaron
Price, all whom I hold a debt of gratitude to. They said they
would invest as much as I put in, so I put in everything. All the
money I had left. Literally everything. I didn’t have a house. I
was staying in Jeff Skoll’s spare bedroom.



   (Note from Eric: At this point, Steve Jurvetson might interject with
   this context about entrepreneurial heroism.


   “Elon wrote a check for the entire remainder of his personal wealth
   to save the company, covering payroll during Christmas when no
   one else would. The economy was in a bad situation. Goldman just
   failed a private offering. It was the middle of the financial crisis.


   Tesla did not look appealing, either. There was no DOE loan. There
   was no Daimler deal. The car had a negative gross margin. Oh,
   and the largest shareholder was pissed off, going AWOL. It was
   ugly.”)520




                                                 B uilding T esla  · 2 0 3
We closed that round at 6:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve 2008.
It was the last hour of the last day possible. We would have
bounced payroll two days after Christmas.


Eventually, Daimler executives came to visit. They showed up
expecting a PowerPoint. While they were on their way over, we
dropped a Roadster motor and battery into a Smart Car and let
them drive it. They were shocked when it hit 60 mph in four
seconds. Daimler ended up investing $50 million. If Daimler
had not invested in Tesla at that time, we would have died.521


It’s definitely stressful when death is inches from your face,
trying to eat your face off—like right there and the foam is
spattering on you.522


For a while all I could think was, “We need to live. How do we
live?”523




At both SpaceX and Tesla in 2008, if we’d paid our
suppliers on time we would have gone bankrupt
immediately.524




204 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
THE EDGE OF SANITY
Q: How do you prioritize with so many things going on at
once?


Prioritizing has usually been out of desperation, not selection.
It’s not, “Oh, let’s sit back and leisurely decide how we shall
spend these resources.” It’s, “This isn’t working, if we don’t
make it work, we’re gonna go bankrupt, so we better make
it work.”


We messed up almost every aspect of the Model 3 production
line. There were so many mistakes, the entire company had
to be devoted to fixing them. We took everyone off every other
project—we all started working on the Model 3. We had to
make it work or there wouldn’t be any more Tesla.525


There was no choice. We had to get to high-volume production.
It was a chicken-and-egg situation. You can’t make the car at
an affordable price unless you have high volume. Without high
volume, you can’t sell at an affordable price. So what do you
do?526




   You take a giant flying leap at high volume
   and hope you can grab a cliff ledge with your
   fingertips.527



I felt like Indiana Jones running through the temple. There’s a
huge boulder chasing you and you need to jump across a giant
pit in the ground. If you slow down, the boulder will crush


                                         B uilding T esla  · 2 0 5
you, and if you don’t make the leap, you’ll die in the pit. That’s
prioritizing.528


Q: How did you motivate the team to do whatever it takes?




I told them we had to go ultrahardcore. They had
to prepare for a level of intensity greater than
anything they had experienced before.529



I lived in the Fremont and Nevada factories for three years
fixing that production line, running around like a maniac
through every part of that factory, living with the team. I slept
on the floor so the team going through a hard time could see
me on the floor and know I was not in some ivory tower. What-
ever pain they experienced, I had more.530


I worked to the edge of sanity. There wasn’t any other way
to make it work but three years of hell. From 2017 to 2019, I
experienced the longest period of excruciating pain in my life.
There wasn’t any other way, and we still barely made it. We
were on the ragged edge of bankruptcy the entire time. Three
years of pain, but it had to be done or Tesla would be dead.531


At this point, I think I know more about manufacturing than
anyone currently alive on Earth.


I can tell you how every damn part in that car is made. That’s
what happens when you live in the factory for three years.532



206 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
A WHOLE NEW KIND OF CAR COMPANY



   Ultimately, what we induce other companies to do
   will have a greater impact than the cars we make
   ourselves.533



Q: A Tesla is a very different product, but how different is
Tesla as a company from a traditional auto company?


A typical car company manages a supply chain, assembles
vehicles, and sends them to dealers. They might make the
engine, but most of the actual technology development and
parts manufacturing is done by suppliers. Most of the vehicle
software is done by suppliers too. The amount of “real work”
done by car companies like GM or Ford is not as much as you
think. They don’t do sales or service either; dealerships do.534


At Tesla, we do our own sales and service. We don’t have dealer-
ships.535 I have made it a principle within Tesla that we should
never attempt to make service a profit center. It does not seem
right to me when companies make a profit off customers when
their product breaks.536 The best way to experience service is,
of course, to not need service.537




   If we charge for something, it is not because we
   want to make things more expensive; it’s because
   we can’t figure out how to make it less expensive.538


                                         B uilding T esla  · 2 0 7
There’s a lot of vertical integration at Tesla. We make the bat-
tery pack, the power electronics, and the drivetrain ourselves.
We’re vertically integrated because the pace we needed to
move was much faster than the supply chain could move. To
the degree you rely on the legacy supply chain, you inherit
the legacy constraints—including their speed, costs, and
technology.


We do car insurance now, too. Car insurance is a bigger deal
than it may seem. A lot of people are paying 30–40 percent as
much as their car lease payment for insurance. The car insur-
ance industry is incredibly inefficient because they’ve got all
these middlemen, from the insurance agent all the way to the
final reinsurer. There are a half dozen companies each taking
a cut.539


Insurance is driven by statistics, so even if you’re a good driver
at twenty years old, it’s extremely expensive. Tesla allows for
real-time insurance based on how you actually drive the car. If
you drive the car in a safer way, you pay lower insurance. Our
insurance is based on how you drive, not how people who fit
your demographic have driven historically.540


Tesla is as much a software company as a hardware com-
pany. The software in a Tesla operates the car, the screen, the
charging…all developed by us. Then, Tesla built an autopilot
AI team from scratch, the best real-world AI team on Earth.
We also built a chip team too, because the hardware we could
buy wasn’t capable of running our AI software.541


Q: How important is the look and design of the cars?




208 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   The value of beauty and inspiration is underrated,
   no question.542



If you want to make something beautiful, you must trigger
whatever fundamental aesthetic algorithms there are. Our
brains have some intrinsic elements that represent beauty,
which trigger the emotion of appreciation of beauty in our
mind.


I think these are relatively consistent among people. Not com-
pletely. Not everyone likes exactly the same thing, but there’s a
lot of commonality. It is important to combine aesthetic design
with functionality.


What was hard about the Model S and Model X was to combine
aesthetics and utility, to balance the two. You can make a car
look good by giving it certain proportions—making it low and
slim. But if you do that, the utility is significantly affected. The
big challenge is trying to figure out how to get five adults plus
two kids in a seven-seater with high utility and keep it looking
good. To make a sports car look good is relatively easy. But to
make a sedan or an SUV look good is quite difficult.543


Another incredibly important design principle is to have it feel
bigger on the inside than it looks on the outside. That’s also a
hard thing to do.544


Most people don’t consciously notice the small details, but they
do subconsciously. Your mind takes in an overall impression.
You know if something is appealing or not, even though you


                                            B uilding T esla  · 2 0 9
may not be able to point out exactly why. That sense is a sum-
mation of many details. Most of us experience this as “that’s
ugly,” or “that’s beautiful,” or “wow, that’s elegant,” but can’t
break down why.545


You can train yourself. You can make yourself pay attention
to “why.” You can learn to bring subconscious awareness into
conscious awareness. Look closely and carefully. Look at each
object’s geometry.546


Pay attention to the little details. Train yourself to notice them.
Notice the nuances of design, shape, form, function, and the
way it looks in different lights. Anyone can do this, although
it is a double-edged sword, because then you always notice
all the little things. Now when something’s off—even a little
thing—it drives me bananas.




If you’re trying to make a perfect product, attention
to detail is essential.547




210 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
GIVE PEOPLE MORE FOR LESS



   Revolutionizing industries is not for the faint of
   heart.548



Q: How do you think about iterating through products to
reach a mass market?


The nature of new technology adoption tends to follow an
S-curve. People underpredict it in the beginning, because they
tend to extrapolate trends in a straight line. Then they’ll over-
predict it at the midpoint during massive growth. It will take
longer than people think at the midpoint, but much shorter
than people think at the beginning.549


One way to look at technology is like rendering an image in
successive levels of detail. The first layer of the image is very
blurry and things are out of place. Then with the next pass,
it gets a bit more defined and things start to shift into place.
And you do another pass and another pass, and eventually it’s
refined and actually works.550 It generally takes three major
iterations of any major new technology to have it work really,
really well.551


Progress comes from design and technology improvements
as well as scale. Look at the earliest cell phones. In the orig-
inal Wall Street movie in 1987, the guy’s walking down the
beach with a giant phone, carrying a briefcase to power it. It
had like thirty minutes of battery life. Without technology
improvements, no amount of money or scale could have made


                                          B uilding T esla  · 2 1 1
that phone affordable. It took a lot of engineering and design
iterations.552


In the early days of cell phones, laptops, and gasoline cars, they
were considered toys for rich people. You need to go through
this phase of having an expensive car available to few in order
to build the low-cost car available to many. The first version
is simply about making the new technology work. Then, you
work to optimize.553


We’re probably on the thirtieth version of a cell phone, and
with each successive design iteration we add more capability.
We integrate more parts and figure out better ways to produce
it so it gets both better and cheaper. Progress in any new tech-
nology takes multiple versions and a large production volume
to make it affordable.554


Air travel used to be accessible to only a few people. It was
insanely expensive and dangerous. Now it is common to fly.
The first TVs were rare and expensive. Then big, flat-screen
plasma TVs used to be extremely expensive. Now, you can
buy an amazing flat-screen plasma for two hundred bucks.
It’s amazing.555


This is also true for electric cars. The strategy for Tesla was to
enter at the high end of the market with the Roadster, where
customers are prepared to pay a premium. Then move as fast
as possible to higher volume and lower prices with each suc-
cessive model.556


The Model S was a sporty four-door family car at roughly half
the price point of the Roadster. Then the Model 3 was even
more affordable. All free cash flow was plowed back into R&D


212 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
to drive down costs and bring the next products to market as
fast as possible. When someone bought the Tesla Roadster,
they were helping pay for development of the low-cost family
car.557


Q: Any other unique aspects about Tesla’s product
philosophy?


Focus on signal over noise. A lot of companies get confused.
They spend a lot of money on things that don’t actually make
the product better. At Tesla, we put all the money into research
and development, manufacturing, and design to try and make
the cars as good as possible. For any company, ask, “Are the
efforts we’re expending resulting in a better product or ser-
vice?” If they’re not, stop those efforts.558


Also, go for extreme levels of precision. One of the examples we
use at Tesla is LEGO blocks. LEGO is super precise. The press-
fit comes down to a quarter millimeter or less, and each one is
exactly the same. LEGO doesn’t work if the press-fit is too soft
or too hard. If it’s too soft, the press-and-click won’t stick; if it’s
too hard, you can’t get it on. They can make something that is a
tiny fraction of a millimeter accurate and it’s a low-cost plastic
toy. If LEGO can be that precise, so can a car.559




                                              B uilding T esla  · 2 1 3
THE BATTLE OF PUBLIC PERCEPTION



It should puzzle you that a Tesla crash resulting in
a broken ankle is front-page news, yet the many
thousands of people who die in US auto accidents
each year get almost no coverage.560



Q: How do you stay positive when faced with public attacks
and misrepresentation, without becoming resentful or
cynical?561


It does get me down at times. It makes me sad. But at some
point you realize these attacks are by people who don’t know
you and their goal is to generate clicks. If you can detach your-
self emotionally (which is not easy) and say, “This person does
not know me. They’re just writing to get clicks” then it doesn’t
hurt as much.562


It also helps to stay focused on our mission. Tesla’s motivation
remains to make electric transport as affordable as possible.
That informs all our actions.563


We put all our money and effort into trying to make the prod-
uct as compelling as possible. The way to sell any product is
through word of mouth. The key is to have a product people
love. People will talk about the things they love.564


That generates real word of mouth, and that’s how our sales
have grown. We’re not spending money on advertising,
public relations, or endorsements. Anyone who buys our car


214 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
bought it because they like the car, not their impression of
the car.565




   Tesla does not advertise or pay for endorsements.
   Instead, we use that money to make the product
   great.566



There are over a million internal combustion engine car fires
per year resulting in thousands of deaths, but one Tesla car
fire with no injuries gets the biggest headlines. Why the double
standard?567


The problem is journalists are under constant pressure to get
maximum clicks. They either earn advertising dollars or get
fired. It’s a tricky situation, since Tesla doesn’t advertise and
fossil fuel companies and legacy car companies are among the
world’s biggest advertisers.568


Regulators tend to pay a disproportionate amount of attention
to whatever is in the press. This is an objective fact. And Tesla
generates a lot of press. In the United States, there are about
forty thousand automotive deaths per year. But if there are
four in a Tesla, they’ll probably receive a thousand times more
press than any other incident.569


The reality is a Tesla, like most electric cars, is over 500 percent
less likely to catch fire than gas combustion engine cars, which
carry massive amounts of highly flammable fuel. Why is this
never mentioned?570


                                            B uilding T esla  · 2 1 5
FOUNDING SOLARCITY
Q: How did SolarCity fit into the vision for Tesla?


The earth is almost entirely solar powered today. The only
reason we’re not a frozen ice ball at three degrees Kelvin is
the sun. The sun is responsible for precipitation. It’s respon-
sible for the vast majority of the ecosystem. We could say the
entire earth is solar powered. That may not be super obvious
to people. Also, the energy we consume to power civilization
today is actually a tiny amount of the total energy the sun
sends in our direction.571


I wouldn’t say there was a particular epiphany to start Solar-
City. I was at Burning Man with my cousins. They were thinking
about what company to start after their first startup, called
Everdream, sold to Dell. They built software that enabled com-
panies to manage tens of thousands of computers.572


I was trying to convince them to do solar, because I thought
it was an area that needed really good entrepreneurs. I was
already somewhat overcommitted at the time. I said, “If you
guys do a solar company, I’ll fund you and give whatever guid-
ance I can provide.”573


I thought it was really important for great entrepreneurs
to build in solar because it wasn’t doing well as an industry.
People were not focusing on the right problem. The industry
acted like the solar panel production was the main prob-
lem. It’s a problem, but it’s not the most important problem.
The panel is somewhat commoditized at this point. Making
standard-efficiency solar panels is about as hard as making
drywall. It’s easy. In fact, making drywall is probably harder.574



216 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The thorny problem is figuring out how to get solar on tens
of thousands, eventually hundreds of thousands, of rooftops.
You’ve got to reroof millions of buildings, figure out how the
grid interconnects work, and then manage all those systems.


With hundreds of thousands of distributed systems, managing
them all is tough. It is a really complex distributed energy com-
pany. This played to their strengths: creating scalable software
for managing computers in a distributed fashion.


The SolarCity team did an awesome job. I would show up to
the board meetings asking, “What’s the good news this time?”
They did an amazing job with almost no help from me.575


We want to create a well-integrated beautiful solar-roof-with-
battery product. This empowers individuals to be their own
utility, then scale that throughout the world. One ordering
experience, one installation, one service contact, one phone
app.


We can’t do this well if Tesla and SolarCity are different compa-
nies. We needed to break down the barriers of being separate
companies. That they were separate at all is largely an acci-
dent of history. They have similar origins and pursue the same
overarching goal of sustainable energy. When Tesla was ready
to scale Powerwall (our home battery for energy storage) and
SolarCity was ready to provide a differentiated solar system for
energy generation, the time had come to bring them together.576




                                          B uilding T esla  · 2 1 7
BUILDIN G SPACEX



 Building mass-market electric cars was inevitable.

 It would have happened without me.

 But becoming a space-faring civilization is not
 inevitable.577




                                B uilding S pace X · 2 19
THE ONLY ONE CRAZY ENOUGH FOR SPACE



I’ve always been optimistic. If I wasn’t optimistic,
I wouldn’t be attempting all these crazy things. I
must be pathologically optimistic, I suppose.578


The origin of SpaceX was trying to figure out why we had not
sent anyone to Mars. The obvious next step after Apollo was
to send people to Mars.579


Every year I’d look at the NASA website, and there didn’t seem
to be a date for it. We were able to go to the moon in 1969. Our
last mission to the moon was in 1972. Now here we are half a
century later and we still have not gone back to the moon. It
would be extremely tragic if Apollo was the high-water mark
for humanity, if the moon was as far as we got.580


The space shuttle could only take people to low earth orbit.
Then the space shuttle retired, and the United States could
take no one to orbit. The trend was dwindling down to nothing.
Does this mean we’ve peaked as a civilization?581


If you had asked people in 1969 what the world would look like
in fifty years, they would have expected a base on the moon and
some people visiting Mars. Maybe even a base on Mars. They
would expect orbiting space hotels and other awesome stuff.582


If you told them, “Well, we have a device smaller than a deck of
cards with access to all the world’s information, and you can talk
to anyone instantly on planet Earth. But the United States will
not be able to send anyone to orbit,” they would have called bull-


220 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
shit. “You have all of that, and nothing is happening in space?!”
After we sold PayPal in 2001, I was trying to figure out why.583


The original idea for SpaceX wasn’t to create a company. It
was to figure out why we hadn’t sent people to Mars. I thought
maybe we’d lost the will to explore. I thought we had to create
the will to explore. But that was wrong.


We have not lost the will to explore; people just did not think
there was a way forward. If people don’t think there’s a way,
then they won’t continuously bash their head against the wall
for progress.584



   There must be things to inspire us—that make you
   proud to be a member of humanity.585



The Apollo moon landing was an example of that. Only a hand-
ful of people went to the moon—and yet actually we all went to
the moon. We went with them vicariously. We shared in that
adventure. No one would say that was a bad idea—that Apollo
wasn’t great. We need more of those.586




   The United States is a distillation of the human spirit
   of exploration. It’s fundamental to the psyche.

   Once people realized, “There is a way to do this,”
   we got a lot of support.587


                                        B uilding S pace X · 2 2 1
I EXPECTED TO LOSE EVERYTHING



When something is important enough, you do it
even if the odds are not in your favor.588

When I started them, I guessed both SpaceX and
Tesla each had a probability of less than 10 percent
to succeed.



I don’t look at ideas and ask, “What is the rank-ordered list
of best business opportunities from a financial standpoint?”
I look for problems that are important to fix for people now
and for the future to be good.


If one were to do a risk-adjusted rate of return estimate on
opportunities, building rockets and building cars would be
pretty close to the bottom of the list. They would be the dumb-
est things you could possibly do.




Company stock value is not a metric by which I
judge my own achievements.589



I had a lot of friends try to talk me out of starting a rocket
company, because they thought it was crazy. Everyone thought
it was a crazy idea. Some people had actually tried to start



222 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
rocket companies before and failed. They tried to talk me out
of it too.590


One good friend compiled a bunch of footage of rocket failures
and forced me to watch it. I said, “I’ve seen them all already.”591


I think these people misunderstood my premise. When I
started SpaceX, it was not with the expectation of success. I
thought the most likely outcome was failure.


Their premise for talking me out of it was, “You’re going to lose
the money you invest.” I replied, “Well, that was my expectation
anyway, so I don’t really mind!”


I mean, I mind losing money, but it’s not like I was trying to
figure out the rank-ordered best way to invest my money and
on that basis chose space. I didn’t think, “I could do real estate,
or invest in shoemaking, and—whoa! Space has the highest
ROI!” That was not my premise.592


There have been many times where I expected to lose every-
thing. Who starts a car company and a rocket company
expecting them to succeed? Certainly not me. I thought they
both had a low chance of success, less than 10 percent. Maybe
1 percent, I don’t know. Frankly, I wasn’t wrong.593


We must be optimistic. There’s no point in being pessimistic.
It just doesn’t help. My theory is you’d rather be optimistic and
wrong about the future than pessimistic and right. If you’re
pessimistic, you’re going to be miserable. Might as well enjoy
the journey.594




                                          B uilding S pace X · 2 2 3
Q: How did you go about creating belief and support for the
Mars mission?




If you’re trying to convince the public to do
something, you have to think about what will
excite people.



What message are we going to try to convey? What will people
respond to? What would I respond to if I was an objective
member of the public?


I thought we could send a small greenhouse to the surface of
Mars, with seeds and a nutrient gel to hydrate the seeds upon
landing.595


The greenhouse mission would be the first life on another
planet, as far as we knew. The farthest life had ever traveled.
We would have a great picture of green plants on a red back-
ground. That’s the money shot. People tend to respond to
precedents and superlatives.


I thought getting a greenhouse on Mars would get people
excited about sending humans there. My original goal was to
get the public excited, to get NASA’s budget increased to get a
mission to Mars funded.596


I was willing to spend half the money I got from PayPal, so $90
million, on this mission with no expectation of return. This
was just something important to accomplish. If I spent $90


224 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
million to get NASA a bigger budget, which resulted in us going
to Mars, that would be a good outcome.597


Also, I was trying to figure out if I could afford to build a space-
craft. I wanted to budget for two missions because if we only
did one and it failed, it might actually deter people from trying
in the future.598


I was able to get the cost of the spacecraft, communications,
and the little greenhouse down. But the one thing I couldn’t
compress was the cost to launch. There were only a few options,
and the US options were way too expensive. I ended up going
to Russia three times to try to buy the biggest intercontinen-
tal ballistic missile (ICBM) in the Russian nuclear fleet. That
didn’t work out.599


In doing this, I realized what we really need to do is improve
the technology of space transportation.600 I wanted to hold
out hope that humans could be a space-faring civilization, out
there among the stars. There was no chance of that unless a
new company was started to create revolutionary rockets.601


If a startup didn’t do something to advance rocket technology,
it wouldn’t happen. Either it’s coming from a startup or it’s not
happening at all. A small chance of success is better than no
chance of success. So I started SpaceX in mid-2002, expecting
to fail.602


Q: Why did you decide to fund SpaceX yourself?


After PayPal was sold, I started debating between working on
solar, electric cars, or space. I figured space would be the least
likely to succeed, so least likely to attract other entrepreneurs.


                                          B uilding S pace X · 2 2 5
Nobody else was crazy enough to do space. I thought I’d better
work on space first.


My first idea, the greenhouse mission, would have a 100
percent chance of losing all the money associated with it. If
anything, starting a rocket company had less than a 100 per-
cent chance of losing all the money associated with it. From my
perspective, it was actually less risky than the first idea, which
was just paying to send the greenhouse to Mars.603




The likeliest outcome is I will lose all my money.

But what’s the alternative? No progress in space
exploration?

We’ve got to give this a shot, or we’re stuck on
Earth forever.604



I would not recommend a space company to first-time entre-
preneurs. Space is advanced entrepreneuring. You’re better
off starting something that requires little capital first. Space
is definitely a high-capital effort.605


I’m a big believer in this: Don’t ask investors to invest their
money if you’re not prepared to invest your money. It doesn’t
seem right to me to ask other people to invest if you don’t also
invest. I’d rather lose my money than any of my friends’ money
or investors’ money.606



226 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
 I didn’t even seek investor funding for the first three rounds
 of SpaceX because the first thing investors want to ask you is,
“Tell us about prior successes in this field. What can we com-
 pare this to?” When you have about zero in the success category
 and a cemetery full of failures, they’re not too keen. Rockets are
 pretty far out of the comfort zone of most venture capitalists.


We were able to get venture funding after we demonstrated
we were almost able to get to orbit. Credit goes to Founders
Fund, my compatriots from PayPal: Peter Thiel, Luke Nosek,
Ken Howery, and the guys. They invested before we got to orbit,
so credit to them.


Rockets are hard. I had never made physical stuff before SpaceX,
let alone rockets. I had to show I could actually make stuff.607


Once we started building a space launch company, I predicated
the strategic plan on a known market, something I know for a fact
exists: the need to put small- to medium-sized satellites into orbit.
We served that need initially. With that as a base of revenue, we
could eventually move into the human transportation market.608


First, we built an orbital launch vehicle. A high mass-efficiency
launch vehicle targeted to solving the satellite delivery market.
Our approach was to make this a solid, sound business from
the beginning.609


The long-term aims of the company were always human trans-
portation. But I think the smart strategy was to first go for cargo
delivery, putting satellites into orbit. Our eventual upgrade
path was to build Starship, the successor to Saturn V rocket, a
superheavy-lift vehicle that could be used for setting up a moon
base or doing a Mars mission. That is our holy grail objective.610


                                           B uilding S pace X · 2 2 7
ROCKETS FROM FIRST PRINCIPLES



I was trying to figure out if there was something
fundamentally superexpensive about rockets.611



Q: How did you determine whether your vision for SpaceX
had the potential to succeed?


How could the Russians build low-cost rockets? It’s not like we
drive Russian cars, fly Russian planes, or have Russian kitchen
appliances. The US is a pretty competitive place, and we should
be able to build a cost-efficient launch vehicle.612


I started reading quite a bit about rockets, trying to understand
why they’re so friggin’ expensive. It used to be $60 million to
build the Delta II. Now, a Delta II costs $100 million to make.
Crazy number. Delta II is a relatively small rocket! The bigger
rockets are anywhere from $200 to $400 million.




I was pretty mad, and when I get mad I try to
reframe the problem.613



I looked at the suppliers NASA had been relying on. With sup-
pliers like Boeing and Lockheed, you’re screwed.614


One problem with those big aerospace firms is incredible


228 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
aversion to risk. Even if better technology is available, they
still use legacy components, often ones that were developed in
the 1960s. Everyone is trying to optimize their ass-covering.615


Second, there’s a tendency in big aerospace companies to out-
source everything. That’s been trendy in many industries, but
aerospace has done it to a ridiculous degree. They outsource
to subcontractors, and then the subcontractors outsource
to sub-subcontractors, and so on. You have to go four or five
layers down to find somebody actually doing real work—cut-
ting metal, shaping atoms. Every level above that tacks on
cost—it’s overhead to the fifth power. I began to understand
why things were so expensive.616


Boeing and Lockheed just want their cost-plus gravy trains.
When you’ve had success for too long, you lose the desire to
take risks. We can’t get to Mars with that system. They have
an incentive to never finish the job.617


There wasn’t really a good reason for rockets to be so expensive.
Rockets could be a lot cheaper even if they were still expend-
able. But, if one could make them reusable, like airplanes,
then the cost of rocketry and space travel would both drop
dramatically.618


I put together a feasibility study with a team of engineers who
were involved in all major launch vehicle developments over
the last thirty years. We met over a number of Saturdays in
early 2001 to find the smartest way to approach launch cost
and reliability, and we came up with a default design.619


It was fortunate timing. The feasibility study finished around
the time we agreed to sell PayPal to eBay. So coincidently with


                                        B uilding S pace X · 2 2 9
that sale, I moved down to Los Angeles, the biggest concentra-
tion of aerospace talent in the world.620


Q: Did people give you a hard time for this? It seems like a
lot of people were saying “Elon is a software guy. Why is he
working on hardware?”


One hundred percent. A lot of the press from that time is still
online. They kept calling me an “internet guy” attempting to
build a rocket company. We got ridiculed quite a bit.


It does sound absurd. “Internet guy starts rocket company”
doesn’t sound like a recipe for success, frankly, so I don’t hold
it against them. It does sound improbable, and I agreed. It was
improbable.621




I didn’t study rocket science but have picked it up
along the way.622

I didn’t really know how to start a rocket company.
The first three launches failed. I did not hit the
bull’s-eye.623




230 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
KEEPING SPACEX ALIVE



   SpaceX is in this for the long haul and, come hell
   or high water, we are going to make this work.624



I thought if we couldn’t get to orbit within three failures, we
deserved to die. That was my going-in proposition.625


In 2006, our first rocket landed a couple hundred yards away
from the launch site in tiny fragments. The second attempt
failed too. But, we got further each time.626 In 2008, we had the
third failure in a row of the Falcon rocket. I had only budgeted
for three attempts.627


That’s when I split all the money I had left between Tesla and
SpaceX. It was enough to afford a fourth launch at SpaceX, if
we moved super fast.628


I collected everyone in the conference room and said, “We have
one last rocket. Get your shit together, go back to the island,
and launch it. You have six weeks.”629


Here was my email to the team: “There should be absolutely
zero question that SpaceX will prevail in reaching orbit and
demonstrating reliable space transport. For my part, I will
never give up and I mean never. Thank you for your hard work.
Now, on to flight four.”630




                                         B uilding S pace X · 2 3 1
If we didn’t succeed, we would be pointed to as a reason people
shouldn’t even try these things. We must do whatever is nec-
essary to keep going.631




I don’t ever give up. I’d have to be dead or
completely incapacitated.632



It was an interesting exercise in karma. After I got ousted by
the PayPal coup leaders, I could have said “You guys suck,” but
I didn’t. If I’d done that, Founders Fund wouldn’t have come
through with an investment in SpaceX in 2008 and the com-
pany would be dead. Karma may be real.633


If the fourth launch hadn’t worked, that would have been cur-
tains. I had no money left. It was a pretty close thing. We would
have joined the graveyard of prior rocket startups.634


I thought the odds of the fourth launch working were better
than 50 percent. There was just a little change in the thrust
transient of the first-stage engine we couldn’t see on the
ground. That made the difference. Fortunately, the fourth
SpaceX launch worked.635




We almost went down as the company that made
it to orbit, then died.



232 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
When it worked, my cortisol levels were clinically high. I
couldn’t feel celebratory. There was no jubilation. I was too
stressed. Getting to orbit meant, “Okay, we’re not going to die
today.” We’ll live a little bit longer. I just felt relief.636


But it was short-lived. We were still in a tough position. It was
not like we had customers lined up. Even the fourth launch
working wasn’t enough to succeed. We also needed a big con-
tract to keep us alive.637




                                        B uilding S pace X · 2 3 3
LANDING NASA CONTRACTS
After the successful launch, as I was scrambling to fundraise
for Tesla in 2008, NASA called out of the blue to tell me SpaceX
had won a contract. I couldn’t believe it. I screamed, “I LOVE
NASA. YOU GUYS ROCK,” then hung up. I called our president,
Gwynne Shotwell, and told her to immediately sign whatever
deal NASA offered.638


It felt like I had been blindfolded and taken out to the firing
squad. Then they yelled, “Fire” and the guns just went “click.”
No bullets. Then they let me free. Sure, I was glad to be alive.
But I was still pretty fucking nervous.639




My estimate of success was not far off.

We just made it by the skin of our teeth.



We had developed the Dragon spacecraft somewhat oppor-
tunistically. NASA announced they were going to retire the
space shuttle, and they didn’t have the budget to develop a new
vehicle with cargo transport capability to the space station.


They put it out to bid for the first time in NASA history. It was
quite a big step, and we were lucky enough to win one of those
contracts. Then, the other company wasn’t able to execute, and
SpaceX ended up being the primary means of transporting
cargo to and from the space station.640




234 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Our rocket ended up costing around $6 million, super low
compared to other rockets in that class, which were about
$25 million. We’re about a quarter of the price of Boeing or
Lockheed. Once it was reusable, payload delivery could be two
orders of magnitude cheaper.641


After we did the first two space station resupply missions,
which thankfully both worked, NASA said, “What about astro-
naut transport?” They put out a big competition and awarded
two contracts for astronaut transport, one to Boeing and one
to SpaceX. Now, we transport astronauts to and from the space
station.642




                                      B uilding S pace X · 2 3 5
YOU HAVE TO BLOW THINGS UP



The first goal is to make the damn thing work—
we’ll optimize it later.



We want to push the envelope. If you don’t push the envelope,
you cannot achieve the goal of a fully and rapidly reusable
rocket with high payload. It’s not possible. You have to go close
to the edge on margins.643


We intentionally iterate the design of the Starship at SpaceX
rapidly. This is a fundamentally different optimization for
Starship versus a polar extreme like our Dragon capsule. Since
Dragon now carries crew, there can be no failures, ever. Every-
thing’s going to be tested. There can never be a failure, ever,
for any reason whatsoever. With human crew in a developed
vehicle, we’re in extreme conservatism mode.


Falcon is a little less conservative. It is possible for us to have,
say, a failure with a booster on landing. That’s not the end of
the world. Early Starship models were the polar opposite of
Dragon. We were iterating rapidly to learn.644


Q: Is that different from other space programs?


NASA’s space shuttle had almost no iteration because there
were people on board. You can’t be blowing up shuttles. That
lack of iteration was a problem. There were a lot of issues they
were aware of, but people were too afraid to make changes
to a design that had already worked. There was risk-reward


236 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
asymmetry. If you make a change and something goes wrong,
big punishment. If you make a change and it goes right, small
reward.


They had seen the issues with the O-ring and the insulation
coming off and hitting the wing before, but there had not
been a catastrophe. They figured it was good enough because
it worked before. But that’s like Russian roulette: “Look, I’ve
pulled the trigger and I’m fine.”


It’s hard to iterate when people are on board every mission.
Starship does not have anyone on board during early trials so
we can blow things up, learn, and iterate. That’s really helpful.
To improve safety, you need to fly a lot and have a lot of redun-
dancy. So if you lose an engine on the booster, it doesn’t matter.
Even losing multiple engines shouldn’t matter.645




   We don’t want to design to eliminate every risk.
   Otherwise, we will never get anywhere.646




                                         B uilding S pace X · 2 3 7
    We don’t want to design to eliminate every risk.
        Otherwise, we will never get anywhere.




238 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Before every Starship launch, we go through the list of risks
we predict, which we call the “risk list.” If you look at various
reasons why we blew up, none of the reasons they blew up were
on our “risk list.” There’s a crazy amount of new technology, all
evolving simultaneously. We need time and trials to iron out
the unknown unknowns.647


Q: What is the big-picture vision SpaceX is iterating toward?


The overarching optimization is: “What is the fastest time to
a city on Mars?”


Then subset → fastest time to a fully usable rocket.


And subset → fastest time to orbit.648


Initial production was simply a learning exercise. None of the
initial designs will be long term. We’re just trying to learn in
the shortest period of time. The early Starship assembly yard
looked like a garage shop, to be frank. It’s weird—we have
superadvanced technology being built in a tent in a parking lot.


Early versions of Starship didn’t even have doors. We didn’t
need doors. We did need to be superfocused on getting to orbit.
Then superfocused on getting the ship back. Doors were just
unnecessary complexity. The first ten ships (or more) we won’t
get back from orbit. We probably won’t be flying them again.
Maybe once or twice—if we’re lucky.649



   Eliminate what isn’t necessary to solve the key
   problem.650


                                         B uilding S pace X · 2 3 9
BUILDING THE JUST BARELY POSSIBLE



I was told many times rocket reusability was
impossible.651



One of the hardest engineering problems known to man is
making a reusable orbital rocket.


We have reusability in bicycles, cars, and airplanes. It’s bizarre
to not have reusability in another form of transport. It would
be insane to chuck a boat away after every trip. Getting one
trip every four days would not cut it in a car. But this is how
rockets have worked thus far.652


The design goal is immediate reflight. Refill propellants and go
again, just like any other mode of transport. This is gigantic.653




Getting to orbit was solved in the 1950s. The
math clearly demonstrates there is no point in
another expendable rocket; you have to achieve
reusability.654



It’s not like other rocket scientists were huge idiots who
wanted to throw their rockets away all the time. It’s hard to
make something like this. Nobody has ever succeeded, and
for a good reason. Earth’s gravity is heavy. On Mars this would


240 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
be no problem. Moon, piece of cake. On Earth, fucking hard.
Just barely possible.


A fully reusable orbital system would be one of the biggest
breakthroughs in the history of humanity. That’s why it hurts
my brain. We’re just a bunch of monkeys. How did we even
get this far? It beats me. We were swinging through the trees
eating bananas not long ago.655




   Can you imagine if human civilization continued at
   the current pace of technological advancement for
   another million years? Where would we be?



I told my team, “Imagine there was a pallet of cash plummet-
ing through the atmosphere and it was going to burn up and
smash into tiny pieces. Would you try to save it? You probably
would.”656


When people tried to make a reusable system before, they
would conclude success was not one of the possible outcomes.
In government programs, of course, the program would still
continue for quite some time. It’s funny but it’s true.657


The space shuttle attempted some level of reusability, but it
ended up costing more per flight than an expendable vehicle
of equivalent capability. For a long time, people pointed to the
space shuttle as an example of why attempting reusability was
dumb. But you can’t take a single example and make an entire
theory out of it.658


                                        B uilding S pace X · 2 41
I wasn’t sure if it was possible when we started SpaceX, but
after a few years of work I became convinced. Full and rapid
reuse is possible. It is possible to make this work, and that gave
me hope. Of course, just because something is possible does
not mean it will occur.659




The first step is to establish that something is
possible, then the probability it will occur.660

In no prior design was full reusability one of the
possible outcomes.661



SpaceX’s Falcon 9 was the first rocket with any reusability. We
bring the boosters back and refly them. Only the upper stage
is expended. Falcon 9 is not rapidly reusable because most
boosters land on a ship in the ocean. It takes a while to bring it
back, fuel, and reuse it. Falcon 9 first had reusability measured
in months, then weeks, and now finally days. But, the efficiency
is limited. We can’t bring it lower than several days.662


Knock on wood, Falcon 9 is the most reliable rocket in the
world and launches about every two to three days.663 Every one
has come home safely, which is the most important thing. We
learned a tremendous amount from the Falcon program that
fed into the Starship program.664 We wouldn’t have been able
to make Starship without the benefit of Falcon 9.665




242 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Nobody thought this was possible. But we’re not
   breaking any laws of physics, so we knew it was
   possible.666



Starship is the largest flying object of any kind. It’s five thou-
sand tons at liftoff, much heavier than any other aircraft, ever.
The body diameter is nine meters (roughly fifty feet). It will get
taller with newer versions too. And it’s going straight up; air-
craft don’t go straight up. It’s an insanely gigantic thing, twice
the size of Saturn V, previously the largest rocket ever built.667


There could be other solutions too, but this will work. The
first order of business was to get one that works. Now we opti-
mize.668 Full and rapid reusability will work. It’s just a question
of how many attempts we need to make it work, and then make
it work really well.669


It has to be true reuse, which means rapid and complete reuse.
The problem with the space shuttle was only a portion of the
system came back, and the reusable parts were incredibly
difficult to refurbish. Reuse matters more if it’s rapid and com-
plete—if the only thing we do between flights is maintenance
and refuel, like an airplane.670


If there is no major work required between flights, then the
cost of a flight approaches the cost of propellant. Nearly 80
percent of Starship’s propellant is liquid oxygen, and a little
over 20 percent methane, which are both very low-cost fuels.
The fuel cost of a flight is maybe a million dollars or less.671



                                         B uilding S pace X · 2 4 3
Full and rapid reusability is the holy grail of
rocketry because then you’re only constrained by
propellant costs.672



Q: What made you remove the landing legs?


We fight to save mass constantly, especially with the reusable
upper stage, where nobody has ever succeeded.


Again here, we try to think in the limit of physics. The problem
with landing legs is they add mass, we have to protect them
during reentry, and we have to get a giant rocket from wher-
ever it landed back onto the launch stand. That’s tricky. I was
trying to think of the limit. What’s the fastest way to achieve
reusability?


It would be to land on the launch stand. Why not just have it
land on the arms of the tower it launches from?673


This is the best-case outcome for rapid reuse. It gets caught
by the same arms that placed it in the launch ring. In princi-
ple, the superheavy booster can be reflown within an hour of
landing. It comes back in about five minutes one way and then
it gets caught by the tower arms, placed back in the launch
mount, and then we refill propellant in about thirty to forty
minutes and place a ship on top of it.674


When we first talked about it, it sounded batshit crazy. To
custom-build a giant tower to catch the heaviest flying object



244 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ever made with mechanical arms. Pluck it out of the air. But
we did it.675


It’s an epic sight: giant robot arms catching a giant rocket. This
is much more efficient than having landing legs on the rocket
itself.676




   I call it rapidly reusable, reliable rockets. RRRR.
   Space pirates.677




                                         B uilding S pace X · 2 4 5
OPTIMIZING FOR MASS TO MARS
The thing we optimize for at SpaceX is cost per ton to orbit.
When the goal is low cost per ton of payload to orbit, you can’t
cheat.


All early rockets were a test program. We expected them to
explode. It’s weird if they don’t explode, frankly. To get a lot of
payload to orbit at low cost, you have to run everything close
to the edge.


To get a meaningful payload to orbit, scale is important. We need
to make things big. There is value to scale here. You don’t see
everything shipped by small pickup trucks; you see semi trail-
ers. You see giant ocean cargo ships, not a bunch of small boats
with outboard motors. Scale has value in itself. For example,
the same computer that controls a tiny rocket controls the big
rocket. The percentage weight of the electronics is significant in
a small rocket but becomes vanishingly small in a big rocket.678


The focus is to minimize cost per ton of payload to orbit, the
surface of the moon, or Mars. I’ll give you a sense of just how
much we need to improve it. Right now, the cost per landed ton
to the surface of Mars is more than a billion dollars. You can’t
count the heat shield, parachute, or landing systems—only the
useful stuff. In the case of the Mars rovers, it’s really just the
rover. That is the useful thing. The rover weighs about a ton
and costs a billion dollars to get to Mars. So currently it costs
roughly a billion dollars per ton to Mars.679


To build a self-sustaining city on Mars, that cost will have to
be less than one hundred thousand dollars a ton. That would
be ten thousand times better than the current state of the art,
to put things into perspective.680


246 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
That’s how much improvement is needed. Not a 10,000 per-
cent increase, a 10,000-times increase. That’s what Starship is
intended to do: be ten thousand times better than the current
state of the art. Orders and orders and orders of magnitude
better. But, we’re not breaking any laws of physics. This is
possible.681




   When we started the Starship design it seemed
   utterly insane. Now it’s gone from utterly insane to
   merely late.682



With full reusability, Starship 3 will cost significantly less per
flight than tiny Falcon 1. That’s the difference between a fully
reusable rocket and an expendable rocket. The fully reusable
rocket with low-cost propellant actually costs less than a tiny
expendable rocket.683 By analogy, the cost of flying a 747 is obvi-
ously much less than a small airplane that gets thrown away.


Falcon 1 gets about half a ton to orbit. The Starship 3 will send
four hundred times more payload for less than the cost of a
Falcon 1. It’s mind-boggling that the giant thing can cost so
much less than the small thing.684


A lot of people talk a lot about the number of launches to orbit
per year, but this is not really what matters. What really mat-
ters is the total useful payload to orbit per year. If these were
ocean ships, you’d be comparing a dinghy to a supertanker.
They’re not the same.685



                                         B uilding S pace X · 2 4 7
There must be things you’re excited about, that
you’re glad to be alive for.

For me, this is the most important reason to pursue
the establishment of life on Mars.686



There are various “great filters” that have the potential to
end civilizations. One of the “great filters” to pass is whether
we become a multiplanet species. Will humanity be one of
those species that passes the great filter of going beyond one
planet?687


To become multiplanetary, the breakthrough we need to create
is a rapidly reusable interplanetary transport system. This is
right on the edge of impossible.688


That’s the breakthrough SpaceX is really trying to achieve.
What we’ve done so far is good; it’s better. But it has been evo-
lutionary—not yet revolutionary. We need the revolutionary
thing to work.689




248 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
      PART IV




ON
BEHALF OF
HUMANIT Y
There is something special—far more rewarding
than money—about working with an epic team to
make breakthroughs.690




250 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BUILDIN G OUR FUTURE



 I can’t emphasize this enough: As long as we push
 hard and are not complacent, the future is going to
 be great.691




                           B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 5 1
COMPANIES ARE PHILANTHROPY



If you care about the reality of goodness instead
of the perception of it, philanthropy is extremely
difficult.

If philanthropy is acting from a love of humanity—
my companies are philanthropy.692



Q: What do you say to people who criticize you for not “having
your name on a hospital wing” or making other nonprofit
donations?


I do have a small foundation. I am giving some money away. But
generally, if there’s a way to fix something within the market
system, building a company is the better way to do it. Some-
times there isn’t or there are complications to it.693


If it’s possible to solve a problem with a profitable venture then
that’s the best thing to do. In the grand scheme of things, there
are a few failures in the market that have to be addressed with
a nonprofit. There are some, but not many.694


SpaceX, Tesla, Neuralink, and the Boring Company are philan-
thropy. SpaceX is trying to ensure the long-term survival of
humanity as a multiple-planet species. We also provide global
internet through Starlink. That is love of humanity. Tesla is
accelerating sustainable energy. This is a love-based mission.
Neuralink is trying to help solve brain injuries and the existen-
tial risk of AI. That is love of humanity. The Boring Company


252 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
is trying to save people’s time by solving traffic, which is hell
for most people. That is also love of humanity.695


My fundamental intent is to improve the probability of the
future being good. SpaceX and Tesla will do more good for
humanity than anything I could do with philanthropy. It is
difficult to give away money effectively if you care about the
money actually doing good, not merely having the perception
of doing good.696


Tesla sells twice as many electric vehicles as the rest of elec-
tric car makers in the United States combined. Tesla has
done more to help the environment than all other companies
combined. Therefore, it would be fair to say as a leader of that
company I’ve done more for the environment than any other
single human on Earth. I care about the reality of goodness,
not the perception of it.


What I see all over the place is people who care about looking
good while doing evil. Fuck them.697




   I care about reality. Perception be damned.698




                                   B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 5 3
COMPANIES CREATE WEALTH FOR ALL
I don’t disrupt something for the sake of disrupting it. My focus
is making a product that improves quality of life for people.699


If the output is more valuable than the inputs, that creates
a profit. Profit shows you have a useful company. But in a
high-growth scenario, you need a lot more inputs for future
output, so for a while you have negative cash flow and lack of
profitability, which we had early on at Tesla. In the long term,
of course, that has to be fixed. There can’t be a negative cash
flow in the long term.700


If you create a company that produces products and services
better than what existed before, wealth is created. If you have
some ownership in that company, wealth accrues to you. Doing
good work gives you the right to allocate more capital.701


Sometimes people equate wealth with consumption, but
they’re obviously not the same thing. Consumption is fun, but
capital allocation is a job.




If people want to get upset about something,
excess consumption is more reasonable than being
upset about someone having a high net worth.702



Warren Buffett has a high net worth because he’s doing a useful
job allocating capital for the economy. He’s very skilled at it,
and he should probably keep doing it. But he is not engaged
in insane, conspicuous consumption.703


254 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Warren Buffett sits there and reads all these super boring
annual reports. Does anybody want that job? He is constantly
reading tedious annual reports of companies, including the
minutiae of accounting and deciding whether to allocate cap-
ital into Coke or Pepsi. I don’t want that job.704


I’m not claiming I have no money. But when people hear a big
number for my net worth, they think I have that much cash,
and I’m sitting on the cash doing nothing, hoarding resources.
No, that value is the stock of these companies. Net worth just
calculates my ownership of these companies, if you add them
up. It’s not as though I’ve got billions of dollars sitting in a bank
account.705




   Just as my money was the first into Tesla, it will be
   the last out.706



The alternative to keeping the stock would be to say, “Okay,
let’s give the stock to the government or someone else.” Then
the government would control the companies and be running
things.707


A lot of the push for higher government involvement or expro-
priation of assets to the government is from politicians. What
they are saying is those resources shouldn’t be in control of
individuals who built them, but instead should be under gov-
ernment control. They’re basically saying they want control
of the assets.708



                                     B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 5 5
I think the profit motive is good if the rules of an industry are
properly set up. There’s nothing wrong with profit. Profit just
means people are paying you more for whatever you’re creating
than you’re spending to create it. That’s a good thing. If that’s
not the case, you’ll soon be out of business, and rightfully so,
because you’re not adding enough value.709


A few people do bad things to achieve profit, but that’s quite
unusual, because the rules are mostly set up correctly. Not
perfect, but mostly correct.710


It is insanely hard to build and ship useful products to a large
number of people. There’s a hell of a difference between a com-
pany that has shipped a product and one that hasn’t. It’s night
and day. Once you ship products, is the value of the output
worth more than the cost of the inputs? Again insanely diffi-
cult, especially with hardware.711




If you create great products and services that
create wealth, that should be applauded.

You increased the standard of living of the country
and perhaps of the world.




256 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
                          ?




                 +




Work on things that you find interesting, fulfilling, and
   that contribute some good to the rest of society.




                              B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 5 7
COMPANIES TO START



Work on things that you find interesting, fulfilling,
and that contribute some good to the rest of
society.712



Q: What are some areas you see where people could build
important new technology?


For five years people asked me where I saw opportunities and
I’d say “tunneling.” But nobody did anything. It was initially a
joke, but we created the Boring Company and did a test tunnel
in LA. People still didn’t believe us. Then we did our first oper-
ational tunnel in Vegas.713


There are still tremendous opportunities in tunneling. The
world needs tunnels. All major cities have traffic, and tun-
nels can massively improve people’s quality of life by making
it easy to travel from one place to another. They can be fur-
ther expanded to long-distance travel. If you draw a vacuum
on the tunnel, you can go extremely fast. Faster than a plane or
high-speed rail. I’d still recommend someone—please—start
a tunneling company.714


Another company to start would be anything to do with genet-
ics. If you can solve genetic diseases, you can prevent dementia
or Alzheimer’s with genetic reprogramming. That would be
wonderful.715




258 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Synthetic RNA is revolutionary in medicine.
   Most people are not aware just how much of a
   revolution this is.

   This is like medicine going from analog to digital.716



RNA (ribonucleic acid) or MRNA (messenger RNA) are basically
synthetic viruses. I think people don’t appreciate what’s going
on—this is the digitization of medicine. You can create an RNA
or DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) sequence like a computer pro-
gram and encapsulate it in a lipid shell, so it looks like a tasty
treat for your cells. This is the future of medicine.717


You can do almost anything. You could probably figure out
how to turn someone into a literal butterfly. Your cells are
tiny biological computers. They execute just like old-school
computers, where you feed it a tape or punch card. Your cells
do whatever their punch card says. That was a big eye-opener,
understanding the potential of RNA.718


You could start a company for high-speed travel. Reading about
the California high-speed rail was depressing. California tax-
payers are paying to build the most expensive high-speed rail
per mile in the world—and the slowest. Those are not the
superlatives you want.719


It’s California! We make super high-tech stuff! Why are we
spending—the estimates are around $100 billion—for some-
thing that will take two hours to go from LA to San Francisco?
You can get on a plane and do that in forty-five minutes.720


                                    B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 5 9
There has to be a better way to do this. What would you ide-
ally want in a transportation system? You want something
faster than existing modes of transportation. Let’s say twice
as fast, costs half as much per ticket, can’t crash, is immune
to weather, and is not energy intensive. You can self-power
the whole thing with solar panels or something. That would
be pretty good. The devil is in the details of making the thing
work, but something like this could work and be practical.721


There’s the possibility of this fifth mode of transport; I call it
the Hyperloop.722


For long-distance travel, you can do tunnels or tubes. If you
remove the air or most of the air, you can get rid of the air
friction and go supersonic. You can do so with no dependence
on weather and no need to get to high altitude or create any
sonic boom issues. That’s what I envision for the Hyperloop.
It’s basically a pressurized electric car in a vacuum tube. This
will be our next evolution in transport.723


We want the future to be better than the past. If we had some-
thing like the Hyperloop, you’d look forward to the day that
was working. Even if it was only in one place—from LA to San
Francisco, or New York to DC—it would be a tourist attraction
and show it is possible.724


Even if some of the initial assumptions didn’t work out or the
economics didn’t work out quite as expected, it would still be
cool. If you come up with a new technology, it should feel like
that. If you told a stranger, would they look forward to the day
this new thing became available?725




260 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Q: What is the most important piece of advice you have for
anyone who wants to start a company on behalf of humanity?


The final thing I would encourage you to do is to take risks.
Especially before you have kids and other obligations. As you
get older, your obligations start to increase. Once you have a
family, taking risks affects not just yourself, but your family
as well. It gets harder to do things that might not work out. It
is easiest to start before you have those obligations. Take risks
now, and do something bold. You won’t regret it.726




   Go do it. Just go out there and do it. People are
   far too afraid to try. Fear is the biggest reason for
   failure. Don’t be afraid to fail. Just go.727

   If you don’t push for radical breakthroughs, you’re
   not going to get radical outcomes.728




                                   B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 61
COMPANIES DRIVE PROGRESS



The rate of innovation is not constant. This
year, we’re either going to increase the rate of
innovation or it will slow down.729



Some people think technology automatically gets better every
year. It does not. It only gets better if smart people work like
crazy to make it better. We need strong engineering talent
applied to problems. That’s how any technology actually gets
better. If people don’t work on technology, it actually will
decline.730


Look at the history of civilizations and you’ll see this happen
many times. Ancient Egypt was able to build incredible pyr-
amids and forgot how to build pyramids. Then they forgot
how to read hieroglyphics. In Rome, they were able to build
incredible roadways, aqueducts, and indoor plumbing—they
forgot how to do all those things. There are many examples
in history. You should always bear in mind that entropy is not
on our side.731


More recently, if you look at American manned space missions:
We were able to go to the moon in 1969, then the space shuttle
could only go to low earth orbit. Then the space shuttle retired
and for almost a decade America had no access to space for
humans.


This is a pretty bad trend, trending to zero. We need a strong
trend in the other direction to have any chance whatsoever of


262 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
making life multiplanetary. That’s the reason for the extreme
sense of urgency. If we operate with extreme urgency, we have
a chance of making life multiplanetary. Still just a chance; it’s
not certain. If we don’t act with extreme urgency, that chance
is probably zero.


I am not one of the doomsday people. I think we’re on a good
path. But at the same time, I want to caution against compla-
cency. If we are not complacent, and we have a high sense of
urgency, things will be fine.732




   If you want the future to be good, you must make
   it so.

   Take action to make it good, and it will be.733




                                   B uilding O ur F uture  · 2 63
             If you want the future to be good,
                    you must make it so.




264 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
THE AGE OF
ABUNDAN CE



 AI and robotics will bring about what might be
 termed “the age of abundance.”

 Other people have used this word, and that is
 my prediction: It will be an age of abundance for
 everyone.734




                         T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 65
THE END OF SCARCITY
People get confused sometimes; they think an economy is
money. Money is just a database.


The actual economy is stuff. Goods and services. What limits
the output of goods and services? The limiter is labor. Even
capital is distilled labor, so the limiting factor for the economy
is labor.735


We can massively increase labor by building humanoid robots.
If you remove labor as the limiting factor for the economy, it’s
not clear that an economy in the traditional sense has any
meaning anymore because you have no constraint on goods
and services. There will be no shortage of goods and services.736


The first units we intend to make are for jobs that are danger-
ous, boring, repetitive things that people don’t want to do.737


In the future, the only forms of scarcity will be artificial scarcity
(where we decide to make it scarce, like a particular piece of art)
or unique items like a particular home in an exact location.738


Don’t worry about robots putting people out of jobs. We already
have a massive shortage of labor. We will still have a shortage of
labor even in the future. Robotics will create a world of abun-
dance—goods and services will be available to anyone who
wants them, so cheap it’ll be ridiculous.739


Our goal at Tesla is to make a useful humanoid robot as quickly
as possible. Eventually, there will be millions of them. This
means a future of abundance, a future where there is no pov-
erty. We can afford to have a universal basic income for people.
It really is a fundamental transformation of civilization.740


266 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   People have no idea; the market for humanoid
   robots will be bigger than that of cars.741



There will be humanoid robots throughout factories. Cars
will also be entirely automatic. Anywhere intelligence can be
applied will be automated. That’s maybe 2033–2043.742


As we go further into the future, things are gonna change a lot.
Everything will be automatic. There will be household robots
that you can talk to as if they are people. It will help you, be
a companion, or whatever the case may be. It will be able to
pick up your kids from school or stay with them at school if
you want. It will be able to teach kids anything and support
any language.


Long term, I think the ratio of humanoid robots will be more
than one-to-one. There might be two humanoid robots per
person or more, maybe ten for every one. Well in excess of ten
billion humanoid robots. At volume production, a humanoid
robot will cost less than a car.743




                                T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 67
EXPONENTIAL INTELLIGENCE
Computing power is going to be crazy. The big change is the
cost of computing power, not so much the circuit density
(known as Moore’s Law). If you look at dollars per instruction,
cost is dropping exponentially.


We’ll see massively parallel computers, computing power, and
storage become extremely available. There will be ubiquitous
computing everywhere.744


I expect AI to be incredibly sophisticated by the 2040s. Predict-
ing trends in an exponential curve is tricky, because up close
it often looks linear. But actually, it’s not linear. The pace of AI
development itself appears to be accelerating.745


The ratio of total digital compute to total biological compute is
the key metric to watch. This is perhaps the most fundamental
ratio defining technological progress. It is rising incredibly
fast.746


We’re building progressively greater intelligences, and the per-
centage of nonhuman intelligence is increasing. Eventually we
humans will represent a small percentage of total intelligence.
It might feel like we’re the biological bootloader for AI.747


We’re fairly close to artificial general intelligence, perhaps only
a few years away. It’s possible we are on the event horizon of the
black hole that is artificial superintelligence. Over a twenty- to
thirty-year time frame, things could be transformed beyond
belief. We probably won’t recognize society in thirty years.748




268 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
UPGRADING THE HUMAN MIND



  The internet is a great leveler for information and
  education. You can learn anything online for
  free.749




                            T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 69
The internet is a great leveler for information and education.
           You can learn anything online for free.




     270 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
A thousand years ago there were very few books.750 Even if
you had a thirst for knowledge you couldn’t do much about it,
because books were incredibly expensive and rare, and only
a few people knew how to read. Books were difficult to get
until the Gutenberg Press. Technology is what causes these
big step-changes in civilization.751


Even if you could read and were in the Library of Congress, you
still didn’t have access to all the world’s information, and you
certainly couldn’t search it. And, of course, very few people
could be in the Library of Congress at once.752


The internet is something beyond the Gutenberg press. When
the general public started using the internet, it felt like human-
ity was developing a nervous system. Any part of humanity got
access to almost all human knowledge. You could be deep in
the Amazon jungle with a Starlink terminal and have access to
more information than the US president did in 1980.753


To transfer data before the digital age, you had to write a letter.
Someone would have to carry the letter to another person
with a bunch of physical work in between. That’s insanely
slow when you think about it. Now, you can access any book
instantly; you can learn anything. It’s incredible.754




   Any student of history would agree: The internet
   has been the biggest equalizer in history for
   access to information and knowledge.755




                                  T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 7 1
We already have a digital layer to our minds, in a sense, with
our computer or our phone. You can access any book or song.
You can ask a question on Google and get an answer instantly.
With your laptop, you can outcompute an Empire State Build-
ing filled with people and calculators. These are incredible
superpowers, which even the president of the United States
didn’t have back in the year 2000.756


People don’t appreciate this yet—they are already a cyborg.
You’re a different creature than you would have been twenty
years ago, or even ten years ago.


They do surveys asking, “How long can you be away from your
phone?” Particularly for younger people, even a day is painful.
If you leave your phone behind, it’s like missing a limb. People
have already merged with their phones.757




You’re already digitally superhuman.758



Q: Will the brain–computer interface change humans and
how we use computers?


Yes, an intertwined idea is having a higher-bandwidth interface
between computers and the brain. We’re currently bandwidth
limited. The connection is bottlenecked in this tiny straw of
an interface, poking glass with your meat sticks.759


Ten-finger typing on a keyboard used to be the most common



272 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
input to a computer. Now, it’s usually two-thumb typing. Our
output quality has gone backward.


The sustained output of a human over the course of a day is
less than one bit per second. There are 86,400 seconds in a
day. It is extremely rare for a human to output more than
that number of symbols per day, certainly for several days in
a row. We should be able to improve that by many orders of
magnitude with a direct neural interface—a high-bandwidth
interface to your digital enhancements.760


Noland Arbaugh was the very first Neuralink patient. After he
got the Neuralink implant, he spent all night playing Civiliza-
tion, which is awesome. That’s exactly what I’d do too. Even
with only roughly 10 to 15 percent of the electrodes working,
we were able to achieve a bit per second. That was twice the
previous world record. Maybe five years from now, we might
be at a megabit—faster than any human could possibly com-
municate by typing or speaking.761


The Neuralink interface can massively increase your output
bandwidth and your input bandwidth. Input being written
operations to the brain, where the brain is reading signals.762
If we achieve tight symbiosis, AI wouldn’t be “other”—it would
be integrated with you. Imagine it has a relationship to your
conscious mind similar to your unconscious mind.763


Your brain has to work to compress a bunch of concepts in your
head into this incredibly low data rate format called speech
or typing. That’s what language is—a compression algorithm
on thought, to transfer a concept. Then it’s got to listen and
decompress what’s coming in. Both of these steps are very lossy.



                                T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 7 3
If you have two direct-brain interfaces, you could do an uncom-
pressed direct conceptual communication with another
person. Like consensual telepathy. The conversation would
be a conceptual interaction on a level that’s difficult to con-
ceive of right now.764




 Conceivably, there’s a way to have a digital
 layer of your brain feel like part of you. It’s not
 something you offload to consciously; it’s just
“you.”765



To start out, we are really just solving basic neurological
damage, like for people who have essentially complete or near
complete loss from the brain to the body. For someone like Ste-
phen Hawking, the Neuralink would be incredibly profound.
Imagine if Stephen Hawking could communicate as fast as
we’re communicating, perhaps faster. And that’s certainly
possible. Probable, in fact.


There’s obviously some risk with a new device. You can’t get
the risk down to zero; it’s not possible. So, you want to have
the highest possible reward, given there’s a certain irreducible
risk. And if somebody’s able to have a profound improvement
in their communication, that’s worth the risk.766


We can deliver new information to the brain too. If somebody
is completely blind, we can write directly to the visual cortex
to give them sight. At first it will be relatively fairly low reso-
lution, but long term you would have very high resolution.767


274 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
This is actually our second product, called Blindsight. It
enables people who are completely blind, lost both eyes or
optic nerve, or just can’t see at all, to be able to see by directly
triggering the neurons in the visual cortex.768


At some point, the cybernetic implants wouldn’t simply be
correcting things that went wrong but augmenting human
capabilities. You could even see multispectral wavelengths like
infrared, ultraviolet, and radar. That’s a superpower situation.
Augmenting intelligence, senses, and bandwidth dramati-
cally—that’s going to happen at some point.769




                                  T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 7 5
THE LAST HUMAN DRIVERS
It’s crazy to let people drive a two-ton death machine manually.
They can drive into whatever they want. In the future, it’s going
to seem like a mad thing that people once drove cars.770


In the early days of Tesla, 2013, a guy fell asleep at the wheel in
a Model S, and he ran over a cyclist and killed him. Unfortu-
nately, people fall asleep at the wheel often. If we had already
built autopilot, this cyclist would still be alive. I thought, We’d
better hurry up and get it working.771


There are clearly two massive revolutions coming to the auto-
mobile industry; one is the transition to electrification, and
then the other is autonomy. It became obvious to me that in the
future, any car that does not have autonomy would be about
as useful as a horse. That’s not to say it has no use…but it is
rare for somebody to have a horse these days. It’s obvious cars
will drive themselves completely; it’s just a question of time.772




An autonomous car is arguably worth five to ten
times more than a car that is not autonomous.773



The autonomy system is likely to mitigate crashes except in
rare circumstances. Vehicle safety is probabilistic. There’s
some chance any time a human driver gets in a car that they
will have an accident that is their fault. The odds are never
zero. The key threshold for autonomy is: How much better
does autonomy need to be than a person before you can rely
on it?774


276 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
About a million people die every year in car accidents and
about ten million per year have serious injuries. Bringing the
day of self-driving sooner translates directly to lives saved and
injuries avoided. The sooner, the better. A lot of lives will be
saved and made better.775


Tesla deployed partial autonomy immediately because when
used correctly, it was already significantly safer than a person
driving by themself. It would be morally reprehensible to delay
release simply for fear of bad press or some mercantile calcu-
lation of legal liability.776


Autonomous cars could maneuver with a reaction time much
faster than a human. Over time, autopilot will be capable of
impossible maneuvers that a human could never do.777


I told the team I want the latest data on miles per intervention
to be the starting slide at each of our meetings. If we’re training
AI to drive, what do we optimize? The answer is higher miles
between interventions. It is motivating to watch each day as
the miles per intervention increases. Video games without a
score are boring.




   We always try to do the right thing. When we
   make mistakes, it may be because we were being
   foolish or stupid, but it’s always with the right
   motivations.778




                                  T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 7 7
When true self-driving is approved by regulators, you will be
able to summon your Tesla from pretty much anywhere. Once
it picks you up, you will be able to sleep, read, or do anything
else en route to your destination.779


Mega-long-term, I think of cars as being effectively carriers
for the autonomy software. It’s the vehicle, literally and figu-
ratively for autonomy. It’s the software that rides on the car.780


Eventually, self-driving cars will take the form of a shared
autonomous fleet. You buy your car, and you could choose to
use your car exclusively yourself, have it used only by friends
and family, or only by other drivers who are rated five stars.
You can choose to share it sometimes but not other times.
That’s 100 percent what will occur. It’s just a question of when.781


This autonomy shift is massive, because you could suddenly
have five times the utility of the car you currently have. Say a
normal passenger car gets ten to twelve hours a week of usage.
An autonomous car could be used fifty to sixty hours a week.782


This is all good for the environment, because you need fewer
cars to get the same thing done. We would need fewer parking
lots and garages to store cars when they’re not in use, because
they’re in use a lot more.783




If this is true, as autonomous driving capability is
turned on for the Tesla fleet, it may be the biggest
asset value increase in history…overnight.784



278 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
So, in short, Master Plan Part Deux is:


→ Create stunning solar roofs with seamlessly integrated
  battery storage.
→ Expand the electric vehicle product line to address all
  major segments.
→ Develop a self-driving capability that is ten times safer than
  manual via massive fleet learning.
→ Enable your car to make money for you when you aren’t
  using it.785


I can’t say enough about the profundity of full self-driving. It
will be one of the biggest changes in history. It’s not just some
feature; it is as profound as electrification. We already have
millions of cars on the road now able to achieve this with the
right software update.786


Eventually, a vehicle must be designed as a clean Robotaxi.
We’re going to take that risk. No mirrors, no pedals, no steering
wheel. This will be a historically megarevolutionary product. It
will transform everything. This is the product that makes Tesla
a ten-trillion-dollar company. People will be talking about this
moment in a hundred years.787




                                 T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 7 9
SUSTAINABLE ABUNDANCE



We’re accelerating the world’s transition to
sustainable abundance.788



In Tesla’s Master Plan, Part 3, the thing we wanted to convey,
more importantly than anything else, is that there is a clear
path to a sustainable-energy Earth. It doesn’t require destroy-
ing natural habitats; it doesn’t require us to be austere and stop
using electricity. We have published a detailed white paper
with all of our assumptions and calculations of a clear path to
a fully sustainable Earth, with abundance.


In fact, you could support a civilization much larger on Earth.
Much more than the current eight billion humans could be
supported sustainably on Earth.


I’m often shocked by how few people realize this. Most of the
smart people I know actually don’t see this clear path. They
think there is no path to a sustainable energy future with our
current population. Or that we’d have to resort to extreme
measures. None of this is true. In Master Plan, Part 3, we
walk through the calculations for how to create a sustainable-
energy civilization.789


A fully electrified and sustainable economy is within reach
through the actions in this paper:


1. Repower the existing grid with renewables
2. Switch to electric vehicles


280 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
3. Switch to heat pumps in residential, business, and industry
4. Electrify high-temperature heat delivery and hydrogen
   production
5. Sustainably fuel planes and boats
6. Manufacture the sustainable energy economy


Our models show the electrified and sustainable future is
technically feasible and requires less investment and less
material extraction than continuing today’s unsustainable
energy economy.790


The tools we make at Tesla help us build the products that
advance human prosperity. Making technologically advanced
products that are affordable and available at scale is required
to build a flourishing and unconstrained society. It serves to
further democratize society while raising everyone’s quality
of life in the process.


The hallmark of meritocracy is creating opportunities that
enable each person to use their skills to accomplish whatever
they imagine. Everyone deserves access to these opportunities,
and technological growth can help ensure that each of us is
able to maximize our most limited resource: time.




                                T he A ge of A bundance  · 2 81
OUR EXIS TENTIAL RISKS



 Don’t worry about it.

 I mean, worry about it.

 Because if you worry about it, ironically, it will be
 okay.

 It will be a self-unfulfilling prophecy.791




                              O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 83
THIS IS THE BEST TIME TO BE ALIVE
Q: What period of history would you prefer to live in the most?




Right now. The present is the most interesting time
in history—and I read a lot of history.

Let’s do our best to keep that going.792



I find history fascinating. A lot of incredible things have been
done, good and bad. By learning about them, you understand
the nature of civilization and individuals.793


There’s a lot of human history, but most of it is people get-
ting on with their lives. Human history is not a nonstop war
and disaster. Those are actually intermittent and rare. If they
weren’t, humans would soon cease to exist. But historians
write more about wars than peace. A normal year where noth-
ing major happened won’t be written about much. Most people
just farmed and lived their life as a villager somewhere.794


Life was tough for most of history. In most of human history,
a good year would be one where not that many people in your
village died of disease, starvation, freezing, or being killed by
a neighboring village. If you only lost 5 percent of your village
in a year, that was a good year.795


Not starving to death would have been the primary goal of most
people throughout history. Just making sure they had enough
food to last through the winter and not freeze to death.796


284 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   If you judge history from what is morally
   acceptable today, you’d give everyone a failing
   grade. I don’t think anyone would get a passing
   grade in morality if you look back to even three
   hundred years ago.797



Q: How does history help you understand the future?


I try to understand the rise and fall of civilizations. I’ve read a
lot of history to discern the facts of what humans did.798


We take for granted that “it’s always going to be there,” but if
you study history, you realize civilizations rise and fall.799


I was reading about the ancient Sumerians, who were arguably
the first civilization. They were the first to develop writing, but
eventually they died out. Then, nobody could read their writ-
ing at all. They were impressive in their time but they faded
out as a civilization. The ancient Egyptians, the same thing.
One after another. Ancient Greece had its day. There’ve been
ebbs and flows in the Chinese and Indian civilizations over
the eons as well.800


Only a tiny fraction of what was ever written in history is avail-
able to us now. Probably less than 1 percent. If they didn’t chisel
it in stone or put it in a clay tablet, we don’t have it. There are
a few papyrus scrolls that are thousands of years old because
they were deep inside a pyramid. The little information we
have shows many civilizations rising and falling. It’s wild. And
the basics of human nature are more or less the same today.


                                   O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 85
We see patterns for civilizations as they go through a life cycle,
like an organism does. A human is a zygote, fetus, baby, toddler,
teenager, eventually gets older, and dies. Every civilization
goes through a life cycle. No civilization will last forever.801


The birth rate might be the biggest single threat to the future
of human civilization. Artificial intelligence (AI) gone wrong
is a big concern. Religious extremism is a concern. There are
quite a few important problems to solve.802




We should view our civilization as much more
fragile than we think.803

We must keep civilization going onward and
upward as much as possible and try to minimize
the civilizational threats that occur.804




286 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
WORLD WAR III
I’m not predicting a world war anytime soon. But given enough
time, it will likely happen. This has been our pattern in the
past. In the last century we had two massive world wars, three
if you count the Cold War. It’s unlikely that we’ll never have
another world war. We probably will at some point.805


Any war is tragic and difficult on a local basis. Then some wars
are civilization-ending, or have that potential. Global ther-
monuclear warfare has a high potential to end civilization,
perhaps permanently. But it could severely wound civilization
and set back human progress to the Stone Age.




   We want to prioritize avoiding civilizational risks
   over things that are painful and tragic on a local
   level, but are not civilizational risks.806



Few people alive today viscerally understand the horrors of
war, at least in the US.


This concerns me.


Obviously people on the front lines in Ukraine and Russia
understand how terrible war is, but how many people in the
West understand it? My grandfather was in World War II. He
was severely traumatized. For almost six years he was fighting
in eastern North Africa and Italy. All his friends were killed in
front of him. He would’ve died there too, except they finally



                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 87
gave him an IQ test. After the test, he was transferred to British
intelligence in London.


From the war, he had extreme PTSD (post-traumatic stress
disorder). Like next level. He just didn’t talk. Ever. If you tried
talking to him, he’d just tell you to shut up. He won a bunch
of medals. Never bragged about it once, not even hinted at it.
Nothing. I found out by searching his military records online.


He knows the horrors of war. He would say, “No way in hell
do you want war. Avoid it at all costs.” But he died thirty years
ago. How many people are alive now who viscerally remember
World War II? Not many.807


I recommend people read about World War I warfare in detail.
It’s rough. The sheer number of people who died is mind bog-
gling. There’s a saying from World War I, “Young boys who
don’t know each other, killing each other on behalf of old men
that do know each other.” What the hell is the point of that?808




Something must stop the cycle of reciprocal
violence. Something must stop it or it will never
stop. Just eye for an eye, tooth for a tooth, limb for
a limb, life for a life, forever and ever.809



I recommend reading Isaac Asimov’s Foundation series. The
premise is protecting society through a dark age. My guess is
there will be another dark age at some point.



288 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
I’m not predicting we’re about to enter a dark age. But there
is some probability that we will, particularly if there’s a third
world war. We need to ensure there are enough of us, enough of
a seed of human civilization to revive civilization and shorten
the length of a dark age.810




   Asimov’s Zeroth Law: Take the set of actions most
   likely to support the humanity of the future.811




                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 89
REGULATION ACCUMULATION



Be cautious about the gradual creep of regulations
and bureaucracy.812

Humans die, but the laws they created don’t.813



The early auto industry was a hotbed of innovation at the
beginning of the twentieth century. Many regulations were
since added in attempts to protect consumers. The govern-
ment tends to stand in the way of innovation, even with good
intentions. Sometimes they overregulate industries to the
point where innovation becomes difficult.


It’s crazy how much regulation there is. You can argue and
get these things changed, but it takes ages. One of the things
we’re trying to change is the requirement for side mirrors. Why
should cars need them when tiny video cameras can display
an image inside the car instead? I met with the US Secretary
of Transportation and asked, “Can you change this regulation?”
Still, nothing has happened. That was in 2011.814




I am incredibly compliant.815



We wouldn’t be allowed to put cars on the road if we did not
comply with the vast body of automotive regulations. If we


290 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
don’t comply with all of them we can’t sell the car. If we don’t
comply with all of the regulations for SpaceX or for Starlink,
they shut us down. My companies are cumulatively overseen
by a few hundred regulatory agencies.816


Once in a while, there will be something I disagree with. If I
disagree with a regulation, it’s because I believe a regulation
meant to do good does not actually do good. I believe it is my
obligation to object to a regulation that does not serve the
public good. That’s the only time I object.


Q: But you typically don’t like regulations, correct? We read
many articles about you pushing back on the regulators.


Don’t take what the media presents as the whole picture. This
is not an exaggeration: There are probably 100 million regula-
tions that my companies comply with. There are maybe five
that we disagree with.


If you sum up only the arguments I had with hundreds of regu-
lators over decades, it can sound terrible. The media does this
without mentioning the 100 million regulations we agreed with.
They focus only on the five I disagreed with. People only hear
about the five and think, “Wow, this guy’s a real maverick.”817




   The natural tendency is for the hand of the
   government to get heavier every year.818



The government told me if SpaceX hired anyone who is not a


                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 91
permanent resident of the United States I would go to prison.
The presumption is that if somebody’s not a permanent resi-
dent, they might take the rocket technology to countries that
would use it to cause harm to the United States. Okay, solid
reasoning. I agree.819


Then a few years later, the Department of Justice sued SpaceX
for failing to hire asylum seekers.


If we hire anyone who’s not a permanent resident, we go to
prison. Now, we’re told if we don’t hire asylum seekers, we
also go to prison. That seems insane.


We have to work to actively reduce the number of laws and
regulations. Otherwise, as more laws and regulations are
passed, eventually everything becomes illegal. You get into
these Orwellian situations where going left is illegal and going
right is illegal. There isn’t anything you can do that is legal.


That’s why the California High-Speed Rail project has built
only a tiny section that doesn’t even have rail on it, even after
spending several billion dollars. California has made almost
everything illegal. No one can make progress. This is why we
can’t build high-speed rail in America. It’s illegal.




It’s not an engineering failure; it’s the regulations.820

Something needs to change. Civilization’s arteries
harden over time and we get less and less done
because there’s a rule against everything.821


292 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Obviously we don’t want world wars, but wars can have some
silver lining. After World Wars I and II, there were huge resets
on rules and regulations. Historically, what has cleared away
the cobwebs of regulation has been war.822


Regulators and legislators create new rules and regulations
every year, but don’t put any effort into removing them.823
Without a cleansing function for rules and regulations, they
accumulate every year. This is a problem.824


Eventually, we’re like Gulliver, tied down by thousands of little
strings. You can’t move. No single one of those strings is the
issue. The problem is there are a million of them.825 We lose
our freedom, one regulation at a time.826




                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 93
UNSUSTAINABLE ENERGY



Generating sustainable energy is the biggest
environmental issue that we face.827



I’m much less of a climate alarmist than people might think.
But we’re running this climate experiment, which we know is
pointless because eventually we will run out of coal, oil, and gas.
This experiment is not going to last forever. We have to tran-
sition to something that is long term because we will run out
of hydrocarbons to burn. Let’s just not run the experiment.828


Long term, most of civilization’s energy is going to come from
solar. Obviously the sun only shines during the day and some-
times it’s cloudy, so we need batteries. Solar will be the main
way that civilization is powered long term.




As long as the sun is shining we’ll be fine.

If humanity had to get all of its energy from the sun,
it could.



Sometimes people say, “What about clouds?” Here is my
response, “Do plants grow?” They grow through a solar-
powered chemical reaction. If plants grow, you have solar
power.829


294 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
But between now and then we need to maintain nuclear power.
I can’t emphasize enough, please do not shut down the nuclear
power plants and please reopen the ones that have been shut
down. It is total madness to shut them down. Total madness.830


I’m in favor of nuclear power in any place not subject to
extreme natural disasters. Nuclear power is a great way to
generate electricity. Obviously we should not be starting up
coal plants and shutting down nuclear plants. It doesn’t make
any sense at all. Coal plants are a hundred to a thousand times
worse for our health than nuclear power plants.831


How many people have actually died from nuclear accidents?
Practically none. How many people have died from coal plants?
It’s a very big number.832


It’s a national security risk to shut these things down. It’s not
only bad for the climate; it is a national security risk as well.
People don’t understand that coal power plant emissions
cause many deaths every year. They are far more dangerous
than nuclear power plants.833


The future of energy will be primarily solar with wind. We
absolutely need stationary storage batteries because of the
intermittency of both solar and wind. There will also be hydro-
electric, geothermal, and nuclear—these are all good. Battery
cell production is the fundamental rate-limiter slowing down
a sustainable-energy future. Very important problem.834


We want to move as quickly as we can to a solar electric econ-
omy. The faster we get there, the better it is for the world.835




                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 95
We could probably have a civilization that is a
hundred times as energy intensive as we currently
have it.836




296 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
MISALIGNED ARTIFICIAL SUPERINTELLIGENCE
I’ve never seen any technology grow as fast as AI, and I’ve seen
a lot of technology.837


We’re quite close to digital superintelligence, which will be
smarter than any human at anything. Hopefully they will dis-
cover new physics; I think they will. They’re definitely going
to invent new technologies.838


Digital superintelligence is also a potential great filter. I hope
it isn’t, but it might be.


We must be very careful in how we develop AI. It’s a great
power, and with great power comes great responsibility. It
would be wise for us to have (at least) an objective third party
who can go in and understand what the various leading players
are doing with AI. Even if there’s no enforcement ability, at
least they can voice concerns publicly.839




   The pace of progress matters a lot. We don’t want
   to develop digital superintelligence too far before
   being able to do a merged brain–computer
   interface.840



We’re on the cusp of an artificial intelligence revolution. For
a very long time, we’ve been the smartest creatures on Earth.
That’s been our defining characteristic. Now, what happens
when there’s something way smarter than us?841



                                   O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 97
AI is obviously going to surpass human intelligence by a lot.
There’s some risk that something bad happens, something
humanity can’t control after that point. Either a small group of
people monopolize AI power, the AI goes rogue, or something
like that. It may not, but it could.842


If AI superintelligence is linked to human will, particularly a
large number of humans, it would be guided to an outcome
desired by a large group, because it would be a function of
their will.


If our communication bandwidth is too low, our integra-
tion with AI would be weak. The AI is going to go off by itself,
because we’re too slow to talk to or work with. The faster the
communication, the more we’ll be integrated—the slower the
communication, the less.


The more separate we are—the more the AI is “other”—the
more likely it is to turn on us. If the AIs are all separate and
vastly more intelligent than us, how do we ensure they don’t
have optimization functions contrary to the best interests of
humanity?


We may end up with the choice of either being useless and
left behind, or being a pet—like a house cat—unless we figure
out some way to be symbiotic and merge with AI. (A house cat
would be a good outcome, by the way.)


Q: How do we reduce the risk that AI becomes a “great filter”?


We must build benign AI that loves humanity. It is extremely
important to build AI with a rigorous adherence to truth, even
if that truth is politically incorrect. My intuition is AI could


298 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
be very dangerous if you force it to believe things that are not
true.843


Jeff Hinton invented a number of the key principles in artifi-
cial intelligence. He puts the probability of annihilating the
human race around 10–20 percent. Mitigating the risks of AI
is important.844 We should be concerned about having AI be
vastly beyond us and decoupled from human will.845


You get dangerous outcomes when you program AI to be polit-
ically correct. Things that may seem relatively innocuous now
will not be in the future if AI has immense power.


Take the Google Gemini example, where it refused to produce
a picture of George Washington as a white man. In fact, any
historical figure would automatically be made diverse because
it had been programmed to insist on diversity. That sounds
okay at first, but what if the AI has so much power it can actu-
ally enforce diversity?


It could decide there are too many of one kind of people, and
kill people until the diversity amount is what it has been pro-
grammed to believe is “correct.”846




   Mark my words: If we do not program AI to be as
   truthful as possible, that is where it will go. That is
   where the danger lies.847




                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 2 99
Superpowerful AI programmed in this way has severe
civilization-level risk. I’ve seen quite a few technologies
develop, but none with this level of risk. Artificial general
intelligence (AGI) is a significantly higher risk than nuclear
weapons, in my opinion.848


The core plot premise of 2001: A Space Odyssey was that things
went wrong when they forced the AI (known as HAL 9000)
to lie. The AI was not allowed to let the crew know about the
monolith that they were going to see but it also had to take the
crew to the monolith. The conclusion of the AI was to kill the
crew and take their bodies to the monolith.849


The lesson there is: Don’t force an AI to lie or do things that
are axiomatically incompatible, or mutually impossible. Don’t
force AI to lie, even if the truth is unpleasant.850


Honesty is the best policy.851 We want to have a maximally
truthful AI, even if what it says is not “politically correct.” We
want it to focus on being as accurate as possible.852


I can’t emphasize this enough. A rigorous adherence to truth is
the most important thing for AI safety. And, obviously, empa-
thy for humanity and life as we know it.853




AI mirrors the mistakes of its creators.854




300 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
AI mirrors the MISTEAKS of its creators.
AI mirrors the MISTEAKS of its creators.




                      O ur E xistential R isks  · 3 0 1
Q: Do you think anyone should be trying to regulate this?


There are regulations around anything that is a physical danger
to the public. Cars, communications, rockets, aircraft, and
medication are all heavily regulated.855


The general philosophy about regulation is there needs to be
some government oversight when something is a danger to
the public. People often don’t understand how slow regulation
tends to work. It’s slow.856


Usually, some new technology will cause damage or death.
Then there will be an outcry. Then there will be an investiga-
tion. Years will pass. Then there will be an insight committee.
Then they get to rule-making. Then there will be oversight, and
eventually regulation and enforcement. This all takes years.
This is the normal course of new regulations.


Look at automotive regulations. The auto industry successfully
fought any regulations on seat belts for more than a decade,
even though the numbers were extremely obvious. If you had
a seat belt on, you were far less likely to die or be seriously
injured. Unequivocally. Eventually, after many people died for
years, regulators insisted on seat belts.


This time frame is not relevant to artificial intelligence. You
can’t take ten years from the point it becomes dangerous. It’s
too late.857




302 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   I was trying to sound the alarm on the AI front for
   quite a while, but it was clearly having no impact.

   I realized we couldn’t stop it, so we’ll have to try to
   develop it in a good way.858



This is what we are addressing at Neuralink. Our initial goal is
to help people who are quadriplegics or tetraplegics be able to
operate their phone or computer. There is always some risk in
the beginning, because it’s new technology. The risk–reward
trade has to make sense. If you’re quadriplegic and with the
Neuralink you can operate a phone even faster than someone
with working thumbs, that would be a life-changer.859


There are a bunch of other things that could be addressed, like
extreme depression or morbid obesity, where people die at age
thirty-five. We could literally change the setting in your brain
and turn off hunger.860


Memory enhancement can help people who have memory
problems, which could allow them to function well much later
in life. Mental disablement of one kind or another happens to
all of us if we get old enough.861


Brain–computer interfaces are stunning technology. There
may be a way to take the signals from the motor cortex in the
brain and send signals to the spine past where the neurons are
broken. If so, paralyzed people could move their bodies again.


We may enable people to walk again, which would be wild.
Even full-body reanimation. Jesus-level stuff.862


                                  O ur E xistential R isks  · 3 0 3
POPULATION COLLAPSE



A low birth rate is a slow death for a civilization.863



Most historians overlook the role of low birth rates in the
decline of civilizations.864 Will Durant has it correct in The
Story of Civilization. A counterintuitive thing happens when
civilizations are prosperous for too long—the birth rate
declines.865


The same thing happened in ancient Rome. Julius Caesar
and Augustus saw the problem but couldn’t solve it. Rome fell
because the Romans stopped making Romans. That was the
fundamental issue.


Yes, there were other causes. They had a series of malaria
epidemics, plagues, and whatnot. But they had those before,
too. It became fatal when the birth rate was far lower than the
death rate.866




If the birth rate is below the replacement rate and
that trend continues, we will eventually disappear.
It’s elementary.

At a base level: no humans, no humanity.867




304 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
If the birth rate is below the replacement rate
 and that trend continues, we will eventually
          disappear. It’s elementary.




                        O U R E X I S T E N T I A L R I S K S · 305
Durant looked at one civilization after another, hundreds of
them. They all went through the same cycle. When the civili-
zation was under stress, the birth rate was high. But as soon
as there were no external enemies or they had an extended
period of prosperity, the birth rate inevitably dropped. Every
time. I don’t believe there’s a single exception.868




Population collapse is a real and immediate
concern.869



Twenty years ago, I noticed birth rates were trending toward
being below replacement level in every wealthy country. We
always have to be cautious about extrapolating any demo-
graphic curve…but if you extrapolate the curves, if these
trends continue, these countries will dwindle into insignifi-
cance. They might completely die out.870


It’s easy to predict what the population of any given country
will be. Just take how many babies were born, multiply that
by life expectancy, and that’s what the population will be if the
birth rate continues to that level. It’s very straightforward.871


You can see the demographic trends clearly. It’s a very slow-
moving ship. You know who’s going to be an adult in twenty
years based on who was born last year.872


China had a one-child policy. About 2015 they changed it to
a two-child policy, then a few years later they changed it to a
three-child policy. The birth rate kept plummeting the whole


306 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
time. They recently had their lowest growth rate ever. China’s
birth rate reached 40 percent below replacement. Japan is far
along in this. Japan declined by six hundred thousand people
in 2021.873


The US has been below replacement rates since the early 1970s.
The only reasons the population is increasing are immigration
and people living longer. People living longer is why the popu-
lation of Earth isn’t plummeting already—but it will.


Q: There seem to be a lot of people concerned about overpop-
ulation. Isn’t that more of a problem than underpopulation?




  The biggest myth that exists right now is this
  “overpopulation” myth.

   In fact, we have a population collapse problem.874



They are operating on beliefs that were true in the past but
are no longer true.875 These are not subjective matters; you
can look at the birth rate. It’s an objective number. How many
babies were born? There are obvious public records of this
information.876


I’m pro-environment, but the environmental movement has
gone too far.877 The extremist environmentalists view humans
as a blight on Earth.878


Environmentalism started out with good intentions but paved


                                 O ur E xistential R isks  · 3 0 7
the road to hell. It started to view humans as bad. As a burden
on the earth that it couldn’t sustain. These views are com-
pletely false.879 Most people in the world are operating under
the false impression there are too many people. This is not
true. They think that having kids is bad for the environment.
It is not.880


Earth could sustain a human population ten times the current
level.881 Do a first-principles analysis. How much land area do
we need to grow food? How much would that encroach on
natural habitats? What’s the actual food growing potential?
Is there enough water? There’s plenty of water because Earth
is mostly water—70 percent water by surface area. Desali-
nization is very inexpensive. There’s not a shortage of water,
surface area, or energy to grow food.882


We need to revive the idea of having children as a social duty;
otherwise civilization will just die.883 I keep banging on the
baby drum because declining birth rates have been the source
of civilizational collapse over and over again throughout his-
tory. Let’s try to get this one right.884


I’ve heard people say many times, “How can I bring a child into
this terrible world?”


I’m like, “Have you read any history?! Because this is a very
good time. Things were way worse at every other time, ever.”885


Having children is the most optimistic thing somebody could
do. It means you care about and believe in the future.886 I always
encourage my friends to have kids, and I’m happy to see many
of them do.887 Afterward, they thank me. Not one person has
said they regret it. Ever.888


308 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
We are biologically inclined to love and nurture our children.
To find it deeply fulfilling. If we weren’t, we would have ceased
to exist long ago. Take a wolf or some other aggressive creature.
When that creature has babies, the mother nurtures them and
is tender and caring. We’ve all evolved to love our offspring. It’s
a natural thing. And it’s a relatively fun thing to do!889


I had my first kid when I was twenty-nine. As of now, I have
twelve kids with three women. Trying to set a good example
here—having a lot of kids.890 I get more joy from my kids than
anything else in my life. I’m not saying that’s the main reason
to have kids, we should have them anyway, but my kids are
certainly the greatest source of joy in my life.891




   We should increase the population of Earth, not
   decrease it.892

   Go forth and multiply.893




                                   O ur E xistential R isks  · 3 0 9
ASTEROIDS AND COMETS



A big rock will hit Earth eventually. We currently
have no defense.894



If you think truly long term, you realize eventually there will be
some natural disaster—even if it is not made by humans—that
destroys all life on Earth.895


Most people are probably aware of Halley’s Comet. Slightly
under once per century, Halley’s Comet comes near us. There
are probably many objects, many comets that have long peri-
ods we simply don’t know exist. There are billions, maybe
trillions of objects in the outer solar system. Some of them
are super-long-period comets.


For example, when the comet Shoemaker-Levy hit Jupiter, it
made a hole in Jupiter the size of Earth. If that hits Earth, that
is game over. Dead. Everything is dead.896


For all of history, Earth did not have any ability to stop aster-
oids. Now with Starship we have some ability to stop small
asteroids. Large asteroids and comets are still a danger.


There’s always some risk of this occurring. The probable lifes-
pan of all forms of life is much greater if we’re a multiplanet
and ultimately a multistellar civilization.897




310 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BECOMIN G
MULTIPL ANETARY



 The window of opportunity is open right now to
 make life multiplanetary.

 We cannot count on it being open for a long time.

 We need to take advantage while this window is
 open.898




                      B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 11
BECOMING MULTIPLANETARY IS AN EVOLUTIONARY-
SCALE EVENT
Deciding what is important through the lens of history is a
good way to distinguish what seems important now from what
is truly important over the long term.899


If we get to Mars and beyond, that will seem far more import-
ant in historical context than anything else we do. Things like
the Soviet Union will be forgotten or merely remembered by
arcane historical scholars. The invasion of Iraq won’t even be
a footnote.900


If you zoom out and look at a long period of time—a four-
billion-year history of Earth and the evolution of life
itself—there are only about six major milestones. Single-celled
life, multicellular life, the differentiation into plants and ani-
mals, the transition from ocean creatures to land mammals,
and consciousness.


Life becoming multiplanetary also belongs on this list of mile-
stones. It would be at least as important as life going from the
oceans to land, probably more significant.901


The universe appears to be 13.8 billion years old. Earth is about
4.5 billion years old. In another 0.5 billion years the sun will
expand and make life impossible on Earth. If it had taken con-
sciousness 10 percent longer to evolve, it would never have
evolved at all. Just 10 percent longer.




312 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Any species that does not become multiplanetary
   is simply waiting around until their extinction event,
   either self-inflicted or external.902



The geological history of Earth is long and complicated. There
have been many extinction events, not just a few. Read about
the great extinction events in the fossil record. If you do, you’ll
see there have been five major extinctions where 80 to 90 per-
cent of all creatures on Earth died.


In the Permian Extinction, 90 to 95 percent of all species were
destroyed. Frankly, that doesn’t tell the whole story because
most of what remained were sponges, fungi, and things like
that. Unless you were a mushroom or a cockroach, you died.
Almost no large life survived the Permian Extinction.903


This doesn’t count the many cases where entire continents
were destroyed. That happened a lot, but wouldn’t count as
a major extinction. Yellowstone erupts every seven hundred
thousand years or so. That would destroy pretty much all life in
North America. At least we’ll see that one coming now, thanks
to our current technology.904




   Humans can cause our own extinction too; other
   creatures didn’t have that option.905




                              B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 1 3
 I’m a fan of Carl Sagan. He had a great way of putting things:
“All of our consciousness, all our civilizations, everything we’ve
 ever known and done is on this one tiny blue dot.”


People get too trapped in their squabbles among humans. They
don’t think of the big picture. They take civilization and our
continued existence for granted. We shouldn’t do that. Look
at the history of civilizations: they rise and they fall.


Now there’s no geographic isolation. Our civilization is global-
ized, so civilization rises and falls together. This is a big risk.
This should be the most important lesson of history: Things
don’t always go up.906


I’m fairly optimistic about the future of Earth. I don’t want
people to have the wrong impression, like we’re all about to
die. Things will most likely be okay for a long time on Earth.
Most likely, but nothing is certain.907


When I talked to Stephen Hawking many years ago, he thought
there was roughly a 1 percent chance of civilization ending in any
given century. Even a 1 percent chance of consciousness ending
is still too much. It’s worth spending a fair bit of effort to ensure
we back up the biosphere, or build planetary redundancy. This is
important. It’s like Russian roulette where ninety-nine barrels are
empty. Every century is a click. Click, click, click. Eventually…908




Making life multiplanetary is one of the most
important things we could accomplish. This will
help preserve the light of consciousness.


314 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The probability of consciousness existing for a long time
becomes much greater if we’re on two independent planets.
If something catastrophic happened to Earth, life would still
exist on another planet.909


Say there was a giant meteor impact, a supervolcano, a massive
nuclear war, or some super virus. It might not destroy human
civilization, but it could knock us back to a much lower tech-
nology level, and then we risk a decline to our extinction.910


There are certain things we simply cannot avoid on Earth. Is
it within your power or mine to stop World War III? I don’t
think so.911


We may get hit by a comet like the dinosaurs. If the dinosaurs
had spaceships, they’d probably still be around. Even if we
dodge all of that, the sun will continue to expand and even-
tually engulf Earth and destroy all life in the solar system.912


There’s a pretty substantial bifurcation in our future: We’re
either out there among the stars on many planets or confined
to Earth until some eventual extinction.913




   This is the first moment in 4.5 billion years that it has
   been possible to extend life beyond Earth.914




                             B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 1 5
IF YOU LOVE LIFE, PROTECT IT
I’ve read a lot of history, including the darkest, worst parts
of it. Despite all that, I still love humanity. This is why I care
about us becoming a multiplanet species, a spacefaring civ-
ilization—because I love humanity. I wish to see it prosper
and be happy.915


I’m troubled by the question, “Why have we not seen any
aliens?” It could be because intelligence, or even just life, is
incredibly rare. Maybe we’re the only life in this galaxy. We
should do everything possible to ensure this tiny candle of
consciousness does not go out.916


Life on Earth hasn’t been around very long, and it can easily
disappear. Clearly, we need to extend life beyond Earth and
become a multiplanet species.917




If we make life multiplanetary, there may come
a day when some plants and animals die out on
Earth but are still alive on Mars.918



Q: Wouldn’t it be better to use all these resources and try to
resolve problems on Earth?919


About half my money is dedicated to help solve problems
like climate change on Earth and half to help establish a self-
sustaining city on Mars to ensure the continuation of life of
all species.920



316 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The point is not to move from Earth to another planet and let
Earth die. That’s not what I’m saying at all.921


To put this into perspective, the amount of resources I’m
talking about for making life multiplanetary would be much
less than 1 percent of all resources on Earth.922


Think of it as resource allocation. Do you think it’s worth
spending half a percent of Earth’s resources to ensure we
extend consciousness to Mars and other planets, so that no
single event can be the end of our civilization?923


Redundancy of life is the defensive reason to go to Mars. But
also, going to Mars is the grandest adventure I could possibly
imagine. I can’t think of anything more exciting, more fun, and
more inspiring for the future than to have a base on Mars.


Great and terrible things will happen along the way, just as
they happened in the creation of the United States. It will
be difficult, and some people will probably die. But it will be
incredibly inspiring.


Ultimately, if you care about life on Earth, you should want
that life to become multiplanetary and ultimately multistellar.
Otherwise you’re signing the death warrant for all life as we
know it. It’s inevitable.924



   Think of us being a multiplanet species as taking
   out insurance for life itself.

   Life insurance, for life.925


                             B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 1 7
THE GATEWAY TO MARS
What started off as basically a sandbar in the middle of
nowhere is now Starbase, Texas. We named it “The Gateway
to Mars,” because this is where we’re going to develop the tech-
nology necessary to take humanity, civilization, and life as we
know it to another planet for the first time in the 4.5-billion-
year history of Earth.926


Q: Why Mars?927


There are not a lot of options, frankly. Venus is a superheated,
high-pressure acid bath. Venus is hell, almost literally.928 The
moon is closer but it doesn’t have an atmosphere, has only one-
sixth of Earth’s gravity, and is missing many key resources.929
Plus, a Mars base is more likely to survive a conflict on Earth
than a moon base.930


We could establish a crude permanent base on the moon. That
would be the next step up from Apollo. Let’s not just go there
for a few hours and head back; let’s have an occupied science
base on the moon. We could build epic telescopes on the moon.
They would enable us to see what’s going on out there. Maybe
we would detect those aliens!931


When we’re out there exploring the galaxy, we might find a
whole bunch of dead one-planet civilizations. They just never
made it to the next planet. Can you imagine doing archaeology
on strange ghost-town planets?!932


Progress is measured by the timeline to establish a self-
sustaining civilization on Mars. That’s how we gauge our
progress at Starbase.933



318 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Occupy Mars, man.934



Q: How can we actually get enough stuff to Mars to build a
city?


We’re now at the point where we can produce a Starship
roughly every two or three weeks. Now, we don’t always pro-
duce a ship every two or three weeks because we are still
making design upgrades. But ultimately we’re aiming for the
ability to produce a thousand ships a year.935


Starbase will probably be making as many Starships for Mars
as Boeing and Airbus make commercial airplanes each year.
This is really an enormous scale of manufacturing, because
each Starship is bigger than a 747 or an A380.


Tesla and other car companies are still building far higher vol-
umes of complex manufactured tonnage than SpaceX. That is a
way of saying it’s achievable. These numbers are insanely high
by traditional space standards but they are achievable, because
they have been achieved in other industries.936




   Starship is the key to preserving the light of
   consciousness. That’s what it’s all about.

   It may end up being the most important thing that
   we ever do.937


                             B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 1 9
We’re hoping to increase the cadence of flights to Mars dramat-
ically with every launch window. Roughly every two years we
will dramatically increase the number of ships that go to Mars.
Ultimately we will try to get to one thousand or two thousand
ships per Mars rendezvous.938


We’ll need to do a lot of orbital refueling. Orbiting rocket
tanker ships will replenish the propellant of the ships that will
actually go to Mars. We’re aiming to demonstrate ship-to-ship
propellant transfer. It’s hard to make this not look a bit naughty
because it’s two ships connecting and doing a fluid transfer.


We would create a propellant depot ship that would look like
a huge hot dog. Shortly before going to Mars, Starships would
take off with a couple hundred tons of payload from Earth.
They would reach orbit with almost no propellant left, then
get refilled by the tanker for the journey to Mars.939


We need roughly ten thousand missions to get to a million tons
transferred to Mars. We think we can do this by 2044.940 My
guess is that it will require about a million tons to build a self-
sufficient city, but it might be ten million tons. I hope it’s not
one hundred million tons. That’d be a lot.941


Starship in its final form will probably do well over two hundred
tons to orbit each flight, with full reusability and the ability to
fly multiple times a day. We plan to launch about five uncrewed
Starships to Mars in 2026. If those all land safely, then crewed
missions are possible in 2028. If we encounter challenges, the
crewed missions will be postponed two more years.


It is only possible to travel from Earth to Mars every two years
when the planets are aligned. If Mars is on the other side of


320 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
the sun, you can’t get there. Can’t go through the sun.942 This
increases the difficulty but also serves to immunize Mars from
many catastrophic events on Earth.


SpaceX will increase the number of spaceships traveling to
Mars exponentially with every opportunity. We want to enable
anyone who wants to be a space traveler and go to Mars. That
means you, your family, or friends—anyone who dreams of
great adventure.943


We want to get to the point where we’re sending over a million
tons at every Mars transfer window. Then we’re a serious civ-
ilization. A megaton per transfer window. We can’t fly there
continuously, so we’d have a gathering of a thousand ships or
more.944


Eventually, there will be thousands of Starships going to Mars.
Imagine an armada of Starships waiting in orbit for the planets
to align and then this gigantic Starfleet taking off for Mars.945
It will be a glorious sight to see! Can you imagine?946




   This is an extremely difficult engineering problem.
   But no new physics is required.947



Q: What’s the math on the journey to Mars?


The fundamental optimization is minimizing cost per ton to
orbit, and ultimately cost per ton to the surface of Mars. This
may seem like a purely mercantile objective, but it is actually


                             B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 21
the thing that needs to be optimized. There is a certain cost
per ton to the surface of Mars where we can afford to establish
a self-sustaining city. If we don’t get the cost down, we can’t
afford to do it.


It will cost maybe a quarter of a percent or half a percent of
gross domestic product (GDP). That is palatable. A few people
going to Mars will not cause some meaningful drop in the stan-
dard of living.948 For less than 1 percent of GDP, we can buy life
insurance.949




Starlink internet is what’s being used to pay for
humanity getting to Mars. I would like to thank
everyone who has bought Starlink because you’re
helping secure the future of civilization.

Thank you.950



Right now, you couldn’t fly to Mars for a trillion dollars. No
amount of money could get any human a ticket to Mars. First,
we need to make this possible. But we don’t just want to have
flags and footprints on Mars for fifty years, like we did with the
moon. To pass the great filter of existing only on one planet,
we need to truly become a multiplanet species.951




322 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
BUILDING THE NEW WORLD



   Attendance is not mandatory here. It’ll be
   dangerous and people might die.



Few people will want to go to Mars in the beginning. But for
some, the excitement of the frontier exceeds the concern of
danger.952 I think it would be the adventure—the best adven-
ture one could possibly go on—to go build a new civilization
on a new planet.953


Some people seem to think this will be an escape hatch, some
luxury resort for rich people. It is not. It’s a high probability
of death relative to Earth. Long journey. Not great food. A lot
of hard work.954


You have to spend six months on a rocket with a hundred other
people. It will be cramped. Like old ocean voyages, six months
packed on a little ship in the middle of the ocean.955


It’s going to take a while to build a real civilization on Mars.
The critical threshold is if the ships from Earth stop coming
for any reason, does the Mars City die out or not? That’s a high
bar. You can’t be missing anything.956


Imagine you’re on a long sea voyage and the only thing you’re
missing is vitamin C. It’s only a matter of time before it’s cur-
tains. You’ve got to have all the things necessary to sustain
civilization on Mars, including about a million people.957



                             B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 2 3
I would like to die on Mars…just not on impact.958



Some Starships could come back to Earth. We want to offer an
option of coming back, but most people who go to Mars will
probably never come back to Earth.959


Most of the ships we send will probably stay there, especially
while colonizing Mars, because the ship itself will be so valu-
able there. Martians will take apart the ship and use it for raw
materials.960


Once we get to Mars, there will be a lot to do, and it’ll take a
while to build it all. We have to build out the industrial base,
then the city. First, we build a giant solar panel farm to gener-
ate energy. Then a facility to make fuel, oxygen to grow plants
for food, and everything necessary to support life.961


Ultimately we’ll need all these things: power generation, ice
mining, mining in general, propellent production, long-duration
life support, construction, and global communication.962


A fuel plant will create the fuel for the return trips of many
Starships. It’s mostly going to be oxygen plants, because rock-
ets run on 78 percent liquid oxygen, 22 percent fuel. Mars has
a CO2 atmosphere and water ice, which is CO2 plus H2O, so
plenty of raw material to make what rockets need: CH4 (meth-
ane) and O22 (oxygen). Rocket fuel is easy to create on Mars,
and in many other parts of the solar system.963




324 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   In the beginning, people would live in glass domes.
   Over time, we’d terraform Mars and make it like
   Earth.964



Mars is cold, but if we warm it up we’ll get liquid water. Mars
would have an ocean roughly a mile deep on 40 percent of the
planet once we warm it up. That’s a lot of water. A lot of the
ice you see on the poles is actually dry ice. It’s frozen CO2.965


Terraforming Mars mostly consists of warming it up. We could
warm it up either with solar reflectors in orbit or a lot of ther-
monuclear explosions.966


It sounds crazy, but a series of thermonuclear explosions
basically creates an artificial sun. If you’re worried that it will
generate dangerous radiation, have you stood in the sun? The
sun is a giant thermonuclear reactor. Obviously we can stand
in front of the sun and not die. We could launch a missile every
ten seconds or so. It would be like gigantic thermonuclear
fireworks.967




   We’d create two little suns, pulsing above the north
   and south poles.



That would warm the poles up enough that the frozen carbon
dioxide (CO2) would gasify. The Martian atmosphere would get


                              B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 2 5
more dense, with water vapor and CO2 in the air. In Mars’s case,
more CO2 in the air is good, because it will create a positive
cycle to make it warmer with more liquid water—like Earth’s
environment.968




Even if you don’t go to Mars, you can watch this
all happen on TV. It’ll be so cool.969



What I’m describing may sound crazy, but it is a small fraction
of what will ultimately be done, as long as we become a two-
planet civilization. Look at the history of shipping technology
in Europe. When all you had to do was cross the Mediterra-
nean, the ships were pretty lame—they only had short-range
vessels, which couldn’t cross the Atlantic.


Without the forcing function of long-range commerce, ship-
ping technology didn’t improve much. You could do mostly the
same things with ships around the time of Julius Caesar and
the time of Columbus. Fifteen hundred years later, ships could
still only cross the Mediterranean. But as soon as there was
a reason to cross the Atlantic, shipping technology improved
dramatically. The American colonies were needed for that to
happen.970




Reusable rockets are the modern-day equivalent
of the first ships that could cross oceans.


326 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
   Until you have a breakthrough technology
   enabling travel, there’s no way for entrepreneurial
   energy to do anything.



Once we build reusable rockets, suddenly the opportunity is
immense. We’re going to do our best to get you to Mars, and
make sure there’s an environment there where entrepreneurs
can continue building and flourish.971


The same thing happened with the first cross-continental rail-
road in the United States, the Union Pacific Railroad. When
they were building the Union Pacific Railroad, nobody could
predict Silicon Valley, Hollywood, or California becoming the
most populous state in the country. That would have sounded
crazy. But then they discovered gold.972




   It’s incumbent on SpaceX and other organizations
   to figure out how to get to Mars. Otherwise,
   nothing else matters.

   Once we get there, there’s a lot that can be
   done.973



There will be a lot of super exciting things that are hard to pre-
dict. After the basic infrastructure is built on Mars, there will
be an explosion of opportunity for entrepreneurs, because our


                              B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 2 7
new world will need everything from iron foundries to pizza
joints. This includes everything you can imagine, like starting
the first Italian restaurant on Mars. That would be cool, and
somebody’s gotta do it.974




328 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
COLONIZING THE GALAXY



   Earth is the cradle of humanity. We cannot stay in
   the cradle forever.

   It is time to go forth, be out there among the
   stars. Expand the scope and scale of human
   consciousness.975



The big picture isn’t just to back up the hard drive of humanity,
but to grow humanity into a true multiplanetary species. Let’s
establish a regular cargo route to Mars. With the economic
driver of interplanetary commerce, there will be resources and
incentives to massively improve space transport technology,
and then things will go to a whole new level.976


Starship is not suitable for going to another star system, but
it is a general solution for transport anywhere inside the solar
system. Once we have a propellant depot on Mars, we can
travel to the asteroid belt, the moons of Jupiter and Saturn,
and ultimately anywhere in the solar system. This is huge.977




   When space travel becomes as common as air
   travel, the future of civilization will be assured.




                             B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 2 9
One way to look at the progress of civilization is the percentage
completion of each Kardashev level. Kardashev level one is
harnessing all the energy of a planet. In my opinion, we’ve only
harnessed maybe 1 or 2 percent of Earth’s energy. So we’ve got
a long way to go to complete Kardashev level one.


Kardashev level two is complete when we’ve harnessed all
the energy of the sun. That would be—I don’t know—a bil-
lion times more energy than Earth? Maybe closer to a trillion.


Then, Kardashev level three would be all the energy of a galaxy.
We’re pretty far from that. So we’re at the very, very early stage
of the intelligence big bang.978


If we can establish a Mars colony, we can almost certainly col-
onize the whole solar system. We’ll go to the moons of Jupiter,
at least some of the outer ones, probably Titan on Saturn, and
the asteroids. Once we have an Earth-to-Mars economy as a
forcing function, we’ll cover the whole solar system.979


We have to make Mars work. If we’re going to have any chance
of sending stuff to other star systems, we need to be laser-
focused on Mars. That’s our next step.980


On a galactic time scale, even with slower-than-light travel, we
could colonize the whole galaxy. Even some of the neighboring
galaxies. If we get a million years, even with no new physics,
could we colonize the galaxy? Absolutely. The entire galaxy.981




330 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
You are the magicians of the twenty-first century;
don’t let anything hold you back.

Imagination is the limit.

Go out there and create some magic.982




                        B ecoming M ultiplanetary  · 3 3 1
BONUS
THE 69 CORE
MUSK METHODS


These were selected as some of the fundamental ideas that make
Elon and his companies successful. They have been edited or
paraphrased into short, memorable maxims.


1. You are capable of more than you think.
2. It’s possible for ordinary people to choose to be extraor-
    dinary.
3. You can teach yourself anything. Read widely; talk to
    experts.
4. Assume you’re wrong. Aspire to be less wrong.
5. Internalize responsibility.
6. If we don’t make stuff, there is no stuff.
7. Creating products and services creates wealth.
8. A useful life is worth having lived.
9. Don’t aspire to glory; aspire to work.
10. Take actions that increase the odds of the future being good.
11. Every day, we either increase the rate of innovation or it
    slows down.
12. Work on what is just becoming possible.



                            T he 6 9 C ore M usk M ethods  · 3 3 5
13. Don’t wait for the world to want it. If it should obviously
     exist, go build it.
14. Build what no one else is building.
15. As you move forward, allies will assemble around you.
16. Prototypes are proof.
17. Start somewhere, question assumptions, and adapt to reality.
18. Reason from fundamentals, not from what others are doing.
19. “The magic-wand number.” See the theoretically perfect
     and work toward it.
20.“Know the idiot index.” Understand the cost of components.
21. The Algorithm: Question Requirements → Try to Delete
     the Part or Process → Simplify → Accelerate → Automate.
22. For critical items, have meetings every twenty-four hours
     to run The Algorithm and check progress from yesterday.
23. Stay as close to the actual work as possible. Do not separate
     yourself from the pain of your decisions.
24. All requirements should be treated as recommendations.
25. The only fixed laws are the laws of physics.
26. The best part is no part; the best process is no process.
27. Simplicity creates both reliability and low cost.
28. Find the design necessity of every part and every process.
29. Overdelete and add back the absolutely necessary.
30. Push for radical breakthroughs.
31. Be proactive. You will never win unless you take charge of
     setting the strategy.
32. A maniacal sense of urgency is our operating principle.
33. A factory moving at twice the speed of another factory is
     basically equivalent to two factories.
34. Attack the bottleneck. If you have 9,999 things that are
     working and one that isn’t, that one sets the overall pro-
     duction rate.
35. You’ll move as fast as your least-lucky or least-competent
     supplier.


336 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
36. Do things in parallel.
37. Give teams one key metric to focus on. Video games with-
    out a score are boring.
38. Separating design, engineering, and manufacturing is a
    recipe for dysfunction.
39. Speed of innovation is what matters.
40. Beat competitors on speed, quality, and cost, not anticom-
    petitive behavior.
41. Test the absurd. When something seems impossible, ask:
   “What would it take?”
42. Money is not the constraint. Exceptional engineers are.
43. Get everyone thinking like the chief engineer.
44. Get a clear, direct feedback loop with reality.
45. Always be smashing your ego. Ensure ability > ego.
46. Ask, “Is this effort resulting in a better product or service?”
    If not, stop.
47. Good taste is learnable. Train yourself to notice what
    makes something beautiful.
48. Physics doesn’t care about hurt feelings. Make the rocket
    fly.
49. Empathy is not an asset.
50. Use simple, clear, humble terms.
51. Go directly to the source of information.
52. When hiring, look for evidence of exceptional ability.
53. Combine engineering and financial fluency.
54. To truly lead the product, lead the company.
55. Lead from the front. Sleep on the factory floor.
56. Physically move yourself to wherever the problem is imme-
    diately.
57. All bad news should be given loudly and often. Good news
    can be said quietly and once.
58. Failure is essentially irrelevant unless it is catastrophic.
59. Fear of failure is the biggest cause of failure.


                             T he 6 9 C ore M usk M ethods  · 3 3 7
60. Feel the fear and do it anyway.
61. Double down. Push your chips back in.
62. Work like hell. Like every waking hour. Go ultra hardcore.
63. Make sure you really care about what you’re doing—and
    take the pain.
64. We should not be afraid of doing something important just
    because some amount of tragedy is likely to occur.
65. When something is important enough, do it even if the
    odds are not in your favor.
66. Don’t ever give up. You’d have to be dead or completely
    incapacitated.
67. Play life like a game.
68. Go ultra hardcore.
69. Humor is a differentiator.




338 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
TIMELINE OF
ELON MUSK


This is not comprehensive, and focuses on his entrepreneurial
efforts. All ages are approximate.


→ 1971— Born June 28; grew up in Pretoria, South Africa.983
→ 1984 (AGE 12)— Created his first video game, called Blast
  Star.984
→ 1989 (AGE 17)— Emigrated from South Africa to Canada,
  worked odd jobs on farms.985
→ 1990 (AGE 18)— Attended Queen’s University in Ontario.986
→ 1992 (AGE 20)— Transferred to University of Pennsylvania,
  studied physics and engineering.987
→ 1994 (AGE 23)— Completed two internships: Pinnacle
  research working on high energy density capacitors for
  electric cars,988 and a video game company (ironically)
  called Rocket Science.989
→ 1995 (AGE 24)— Moved to California. Enrolled in Stanford’s
  physics PhD program, but deferred. Started Zip2, building
  software for maps, directories, and publishing online.990
→ 1999 (AGE 28)— Sold Zip2 for $307 million cash to Compaq
  (who owned AltaVista). Personal proceeds of ~$22 million.991


                               T imeline of E lon M usk  · 3 3 9
→ 1999 (AGE 28)— Started X.com, investing $12 million of his
  money.992
→ 2000 (AGE 29)— X.com merged with Confinity (founded by
  Peter Thiel, Max Levchin, and Luke Nosek) to form Pay-
  Pal.993
→ 2001 (AGE 30)— Contracted malaria while on a safari in South
  Africa. Almost died.994
→ 2002 (AGE 31)— Sold PayPal to eBay for $1.5 billion. Personal
  proceeds after tax were ~$170million.995 Founded SpaceX.996
→ 2004 (AGE 33)— Invested $6.5 million in Tesla Motors, leading
  the Series A.997
→ 2005 (AGE 34)— Invested millions more into Tesla Motors,
  leading the Series B.998
→ 2006 (AGE 35)— Invested more millions into Tesla Motors,
  coleading Series C.999
→ 2008 (AGE 37)— Falcon becomes the first privately developed
  rocket to reach orbit.1000
→ 2008 (AGE 37)— Invested more than $15 million, the remain-
  der of his net worth, into Tesla Motors, leading the Series
  D. Became CEO of Tesla.1001
→ 2012 (AGE 41)— First sale of the new Tesla Model S.1002
→ 2014 (AGE 43)— Co-founded Astra Nova, an online nonprofit
  school.1003
→ 2015 (AGE 44)— First reusable orbital rocket booster landed
  by SpaceX.1004
→ 2015 (AGE 44)— Co-founded a nonprofit called OpenAI.1005
→ 2016 (AGE 45)— Co-founded Neuralink.1006
→ 2017 (AGE 46)— First Tesla Model 3 delivered.1007
→ 2017 (AGE 46)— SpaceX achieved world’s first successful flight
  of a reused rocket.1008
→ 2020 (AGE 49)— First crewed SpaceX flight carries astronauts
  to the International Space Station.1009



340 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
→   2021 (AGE 50)— Becomes richest person in the world (for the
    first time).1010 Named Time Person of the Year.1011
→   2022 (AGE 51)— Acquired Twitter (now called X) for $44 bil-
    lion.
→   2023 (AGE 53)— Founded xAI to advance AI development,
    competing with OpenAI.
→   2023 (AGE 53)— FDA approved Neuralink for human trials.
→   2024 (AGE 54)— First human receives Neuralink brain
    implant.1012
→   2024 (AGE 54)— Starship’s first-stage booster is caught by
    launch tower “chopsticks.”
→   2025 (AGE 55)— Created a city called Starbase, Texas.1013
→   2025 (AGE 55)— Net worth exceeded $500 billion in October,
    the first person to do so.1014




                                T imeline of E lon M usk  · 3 4 1
ELON’S
RECOMMENDED
READIN G



Expose yourself to as many smart people as
possible. Read a lot of books.1015




                E lon ’ s R ecommended R eading  · 3 4 3
BOOKS
(Since there are so many links in this section, you may prefer a
digital version. Go to ElonMuskBook.org to get a digital version
of this chapter.)



FICTION
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams


This is in fact a book of philosophy, disguised as a silly humor
book. If you read it from the standpoint of “Wow, this is an
interesting book of philosophy,” it is quite insightful. It hits
this point: The answer is easy once you can properly formulate
the question.1016


It also makes fun of bureaucracy. Earth essentially gets
destroyed by a sort of clerical error. Aliens decide they need
an interstellar highway and Earth is in the way. They post the
fact that Earth needs to get destroyed for this interstellar high-
way, but of course, it’s posted on an alien bulletin board that
no one on Earth can access.1017


The Lord of the Rings by J.R.R. Tolkien


I know it’s cliché, but The Lord of the Rings is my favorite series
ever.1018


Foundation series by Isaac Asimov


I recommend reading the Foundation series. It’s about how
there’s likely to be another dark age, which my guess is there
will be at some point. I’m not predicting that we’re about to
enter a dark age, but that there’s some probability we will, par-


344 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ticularly if there’s a third world war. We want to make sure that
there’s enough of us as a seed of human civilization somewhere
else to bring civilization back and perhaps shorten the length
of a dark age.


It’s unlikely we’ll never have another world war. There prob-
ably will be at some point. I’m not predicting this, but given
enough time it will be likely because this has been our pattern
in the past.1019


Dune series by Frank Herbert


The Dune series by Herbert is brilliant. He advocates placing
limits on machine intelligence.1020


Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein


I like Stranger in a Strange Land, although it kind of goes off
the rails at the end.1021


The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein


The Machine Stops by E. M. Forster


An old story by E. M. Forster, worth reading.1022


A Game of Thrones by George R. R. Martin


In my opinion, the best books in recent years are by Iain Banks
and George Martin.1023




                        E lon ’ s R ecommended R eading  · 3 4 5
Culture series by Iain M. Banks


Compelling picture of a grand, semiutopian galactic future.
Hopefully it’s not too optimistic about the outcome of AI.1024


Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett


Have recently come to appreciate the awesome, absurdist
humor of Waiting for Godot. We so often wait, without know-
ing why, when, or where.1025


Atlas Shrugged by Ayn Rand


It’s a counterpoint to communism and useful as such, but
should be tempered with kindness.1026


The Fault in Our Stars by John Green


I must admit to liking The Fault in Our Stars. Sad, romantic,
and beautifully named.1027



SCIENCES
If the Universe Is Teeming with Aliens…Where Is Everybody?
by Stephen Webb


Read it when it came out. Great book.1028


The Big Picture: On the Origins of Life, Meaning, and the Uni-
verse by Sean Carroll


Highly recommend anything by Sean Carroll.1029



346 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The Skeptics’ Guide to the Universe: How to Know What’s
Really Real in a World Increasingly Full of Fake by Steven
Novella


The Selfish Gene by Richard Dawkins


Most people don’t realize that the origin of the word meme is
from this book by Richard Dawkins.1030


Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured
the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Climate Change
by Naomi Oreskes


The same people who tried to deny smoking deaths are denying
climate change.1031


What We Owe the Future by William MacAskill


This is a close match for my philosophy.1032



ROCKET SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
Liftoff: Early Days of SpaceX by Eric Berger


This book is accurate.1033


Ignition!: An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants
by John Drury Clark


One of my favorite books for learning space travel.1034




                        E lon ’ s R ecommended R eading  · 3 4 7
Modern Engineering for Design of Liquid Propellant Rocket
Engines by Dieter K. Huzel


Structures: Or Why Things Don’t Fall Down by J. E. Gordon


A good book on structural design. It is really, really good if you
want a primer on structural design.1035



HISTORY



Learn the lessons of history so we do not repeat
the mistakes of the past.



The Lessons of History by Will and Ariel Durant1036


The Story of Civilization by Will and Ariel Durant


The Story of Civilization will keep you occupied for a long time.
The Age of Napoleon by Will and Ariel Durant is an amazing
book.1037 The Life of Greece is incredible.1038


The Iliad by Homer (Penguin Classics edition)


Something that’s really good as an audiobook is the Penguin
edition of The Iliad. The Iliad was meant to be a spoken poem
so obviously lends itself very well to being an audiobook and
Penguin did a great job of narration. It’s quite engaging.1039




348 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire by
Edward Gibbon


Read Gibbon’s famous book about the decline and fall of the
Roman Empire and how they had advanced technology in
terms of roads, aqueduct plumbing, and so forth and then they
basically forgot about it.1040


Catherine the Great: Portrait of a Woman by Robert K. Massie


An amazingly expansive and compelling portrait of an incred-
ible woman. Highly recommended. Yeah, I know what you’re
probably thinking…did she really f* a horse?1041


Storm of Steel by Ernst Jünger


I was fascinated by Jünger’s famous book Storm of Steel, which
was published roughly a hundred years ago, about Jünger’s
experiences in the first world war. For some reason I’m fasci-
nated by war and history in general. I thought Jünger’s book
was an excellent firsthand account of World War I. A lesson
taken from this book is we don’t ever want to do that again.1042


Not Much of an Engineer by Sir Stanley Hooker


On War by Carl von Clausewitz


There should be a chapter saying, “If you have a decisive
technology advantage, you can actually win with minimal
casualties.”1043




                        E lon ’ s R ecommended R eading  · 3 4 9
The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the
Nazi Economy by Adam Tooze


The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World: From Marathon to
Waterloo by Edward Shepherd Creasy


Insightful analysis, ensconced in eloquent prose.1044


The Art of War by Sun Tzu


An interesting book I’ve read many times.1045


Benjamin Franklin by Walter Isaacson


Great biography of Ben Franklin by Isaacson. Highly
recommended.1046


Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar by Simon Sebag Montefiore


Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar was one of the few books that
was so dark I had to stop reading. If only they’d listened to
Lenin’s last wish, much tragedy may have been averted.1047


American Caesar by William Manchester


Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson


Explore/Create: My Life in Pursuit of New Frontiers, Hidden
Worlds, and the Creative Spark by Richard Garriott


Explore/Create is a chronicle of wonder, and the many won-
drous things the future may hold. Richard and I have long



350 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
shared a passion for space. Perhaps one day our kids will create
and play games on a new world!1048


The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin


Autobiographies are really helpful.1049


Britannica Concise Encyclopedia


Read through the condensed version of the Encyclopedia Bri-
tannica; I’d recommend that.1050


Destined for War: Can America and China Escape Thucydides’s
Trap?—A Critical Examination of Historical Patterns Leading
to War Between Great Powers by Graham Allison


Well, it’s worth reading that book on the difficult-to-pronounce
Thucydides’s trap. I love war history. I like inside out and back-
ward. There’s hardly a battle I haven’t read about. And trying
to figure out what really was the cause of victory in any partic-
ular case as opposed to what one side or another claims is the
reason. Both the victory and what caused the war.1051


Man’s Search for Meaning by Victor E. Frankl



AI AND MACHINE LEARNING
Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence by
Max Tegmark


A compelling guide to the challenges and choices in our quest
for a great future of life, intelligence, and consciousness—on
Earth and beyond.1052


                         E lon ’ s R ecommended R eading  · 3 5 1
Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies by Nick Bostrom


Worth reading Superintelligence by Bostrom. We need to be
super careful with AI. It’s potentially more dangerous than
nukes.1053


Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of
Control by Stuart Russell


Worth reading Human Compatible by Stuart Russell (he’s
great!) about future AI risks and solutions.1054


Our Final Invention: Artificial Intelligence and the End of the
Human Era by James Barrat


Our Final Invention is also worth reading.1055


Deep Learning by Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron
Courville


Written by three experts in the field, Deep Learning is the only
comprehensive book on the subject.1056



BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS
Screw Business as Usual: Turning Capitalism into a Force for
Good by Richard Branson


I liked Screw Business as Usual a lot. This approach should be
taken to heart by all, as it really is a smart move.1057




352 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
Masters of Doom: How Two Guys Created an Empire and
Transformed Pop Culture by David Kushner


Masters of Doom is a great book.1058


The Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith


Adam Smith for the win, obviously.1059


Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future by
Peter Thiel


Peter Thiel has built multiple breakthrough companies, and
Zero to One shows how.1060


What’s Our Problem?: A Self-Help Book for Societies by Tim
Urban


Lying by Sam Harris


I read Lying by my friend Sam Harris. Excellent cover art and
lots of good reasons not to lie!1061


The Parasitic Mind: How Infectious Ideas Are Killing Common
Sense by Gad Saad


The Parasitic Mind is great. He’s got a book on happiness as well,
which is also quite good. I’m a big fan of Gad Saad.1062


A Woman Makes a Plan: Advice for a Lifetime of Adventure,
Beauty, and Success by Maye Musk


My mom wrote a book. ♥️1063


                         E lon ’ s R ecommended R eading  · 3 5 3
WANT MORE?


There are many ways to dive more deeply into Elon’s ideas. Go
to ElonMuskBook.org for bonus chapters, audiobooks, inter-
views, and more.


You might also appreciate my previous books, The Almanack
of Naval Ravikant: A Guide To Wealth and Happiness and The
Anthology of Balaji: A Guide to Technology, Truth, and Building
the Future.


If you love the illustrations in this book, created by Jack
Butcher, find more of his illustrations and much more of his
work at VisualizeValue.com.


To learn about similar ideas, concepts, technologies, compa-
nies, and investments, join my email list at EJorgenson.com
and subscribe to the podcast Smart Friends.




                                           W ant M ore ? · 3 5 5
APPRECIATION


There are always more names in the back of the book than
there are on the front. Thank you to all who generously gave
their time, expertise, wisdom, and skill to create this book.


It’s staggering to think how many talented people left their
fingerprints on these pages. I’m grateful to every one of you.


Thank you first to Elon, for allowing and encouraging this proj-
ect. I’m honored by the opportunity to build something around
your ideas. I appreciate your trust, generosity, and support.


I am grateful to Naval for writing the foreword to this book.
You put into words every hope that I had for the impact this
book could have, and it meant the world to me. Thank you for
kicking off this writing adventure, supporting this book, and
being you.


I am grateful for a fantastic editor in Rachel Jepsen, and the
supportive team at Scribe Media, in particular my publishing
manager, Emmy Koziak, for her patience and flexibility.


I’m grateful to Dylan Kurt for reaching out and taking on the


                                           A ppreciation  · 3 5 7
thousand-and-one tasks that shaped this book and every word
in it.


I am grateful to Jack Butcher for lending his immense tal-
ents once again. The illustrations and visuals in this book are
entirely his. He clarifies and elevates every idea he touches.
He’s a living example of these ideals. Thank you for taking
this project on in addition to all of your own. I appreciate your
talent, kindness, and heart.


I am grateful to Sam Teller, John Durant, and Sky King for their
unique shows of faith in this project and me personally. You
are deeply appreciated for your generosity and care.


I am grateful to all of the fantastic interviewers and writers
who created the building blocks of this book. I learned some-
thing from all of you, and I appreciate you creating and sharing
excellent work.


I remain grateful to my parents for every gift, effort, and sacrifice
that put me in a position to create this book. You lovingly built
the foundation for everything I ever do, and I’ll never forget that.


I am grateful for my wife, Jeannine Jorgenson, for being
extremely patient with the amount of time this required. This
book wouldn’t exist without your wise counsel, positivity, and
encouragement. I appreciate all the love and care you bring to
our family that allows me to work on quests like this. Thank
you for always keeping morale high.


I am grateful for author friends who share their expertise and
without whom I’d have more confusion and less laughter: Max
Olson, Taylor Pearson, James Clear, and Morgan Housel.


358 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
I am grateful to my vast crew of beta readers for their time,
opinions, and wise advice. Every one of you made valuable
contributions to this book, and it wouldn’t be what it is with-
out you. My deepest appreciation for each of you: David Senra,
George Mack, Ruchir Jajoo, Amanda Orson, Patrick Finley,
Alex Wiekowski, Sky King, Megan Darnell, Chase Ilten, Sean
Devine, Sean O’Connor, Travis Stoliker, Brady Kurt, Emma
Varvaloucas, Raffi Grinberg, Alec Gewirtz, Danielle Krischik,
Rame Adi, Everest Brady, Daniel Doyon, Scott Norman, Mitch-
ell Baldridge, Sam Hinkie, Jimmy Donaldson, and Nat Eliason.


I remain grateful to Naval Ravikant and Balaji Srinivasan for
trusting me to create what became The Almanack of Naval
Ravikant and The Anthology of Balaji. Both were life-changing
projects that led to this opportunity.


I am grateful to Ivan Edgar Garcia, my assistant who faithfully
supported me in creating this book and, by taking on many
responsibilities, gave me more time to work. (Shout-out to
Athena for making this partnership possible!)


I am grateful to the authors and creators who inspired this
book. My drive to create and share this book came out of a deep
appreciation for the life-changing impact of similar books, a
few of which I’d like to name specifically:


→ Poor Charlie’s Almanack by Peter Kaufman (of Charlie
  Munger’s work)
→ Zero to One by Blake Masters (of Peter Thiel’s work)
→ Seeking Wisdom (and others) by Peter Bevelin (of Buffett
  and Munger’s work)
→ Berkshire Hathaway Letters to Shareholders by Max Olson
  (of Buffett’s work)


                                          A ppreciation  · 3 5 9
→ Principles by Ray Dalio (and team)


I am grateful for the support of many friends and strangers
online who supported and encouraged me throughout this
project. My DMs overflow with kind words and eager inquiries.
I appreciate every gesture. Your energy helped pull me through
the thousand-plus hours it took to create this for you.




360 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
ABOUT THE AUTHOR


ERIC JORGENSON writes and podcasts about technology,
startups, and crafting a bright future. His blog has educated
and entertained more than one million readers since 2014. Eric
invests in early-stage technology companies. (Please get in
touch to invest or pitch a company.)


He is also the author of The Almanack of Naval Ravikant, which
has been read by millions of people and translated into forty-
plus languages to date, and The Anthology of Balaji. He lives in
Kansas City with his brilliant wife, Jeannine and son, Archer.
Join the author’s email list for more good ideas and special
projects at EJorgenson.com.




                                     A bout the A uthor  · 3 61
SOURCES

1    Elon Musk (@elonmusk), X (formerly Twitter) account, https://x.com/elonmusk.

2    “Elon Musk: ‘10X Every 6 Months,” Farzad, April 8, 2024, YouTube video, 32:28, https://www.
     youtube.com/watch?v=FPpPTp7FIHY.

3    “An Interview with Young Elon Musk in 2007,” PBS Wired Science, June 25, 2015, YouTube
     video, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tqoLRlpROG8.

4    “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence, Multiplanetary Life, How to Be Useful,” Y Combinator,
     June 19, 2025, YouTube video, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFIlta1GkiE.

5    Lex Fridman and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: Neuralink and the Future of Humanity | Lex
     Fridman Podcast #438,” Lex Fridman, August 2, 2024, YouTube video, 8:37:34, https://www.
     youtube.com/watch?v=Kbk9BiPhm7o.

6    “Elon Musk: Birthrate Might Be the Biggest Threat to the Future of Human Civilization,”
     WELT Documentary, April 15, 2022, YouTube video, 47:49, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=2WX_mgnAFA0.

7    Lex Fridman and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: SpaceX, Mars, Tesla Autopilot, Self-Driving,
     Robotics, and AI | Lex Fridman Podcast #252,” Lex Fridman, December 28, 2021, YouTube
     video, 2:31:47, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA.

8    “TIME Person of the Year: Elon Musk,” TIME, December 13, 2021, YouTube video, 12:42, https://
     www.youtube.com/watch?v=PbVSZvC7UxY.

9    “Tesla AI Day 2022,” Tesla, September 30, 2022, YouTube video, 3:23:00, https://www.youtube.
     com/watch?v=ODSJsviD_SU.

10   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

11   “Elon Musk on How to Build the Future,” transcript, Y Combinator, 2016, https://www.
     ycombinator.com/library/6W-elon-musk-on-how-to-build-the-future.

12   “Elon Musk’s Vision for the Future,” Stanford eCorner, October 7, 2015, https://ecorner.
     stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2015/10/3620.pdf.

13   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

14   Elon Musk (@elonmusk), “Broad Subject Interview with @DavidFaber,” X Spaces, audio, May 16,
     2023, https://twitter.com/i/spaces/1RDxlavQqaRKL.




                                                                            S ources  · 3 63
15   Johnny Davis, “One More Giant Leap,” The Telegraph, August 4, 2007, https://www.telegraph.
     co.uk/culture/3666994/One-more-giant-leap.html.

16   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

17   “Elon Musk Talks Twitter, Tesla and How His Brain Works: Live at TED2022,” TED, April 14,
     2022, YouTube video, 54:45, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cdZZpaB2kDM.

18   Jordan Peterson and Elon Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk,” X Spaces, audio, July 22, 2024,
     https://x.com/i/broadcasts/1LyGBgPvoDjJN.

19   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

20   “Elon Musk: Tesla Motors CEO, Stanford GSB 2013 Entrepreneurial Company of the Year,”
     Stanford Graduate School of Business, October 9, 2013, YouTube video, 53:08, https://www.
     youtube.com/watch?v=MBItc_QAUUM.

21   “Elon Musk in 2009—Charlie Rose Interview,” Remembrance of Things Past, originally from
     August 11, 2009, uploaded March 12, 2020, YouTube video, 29:28, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=ktkV0N0Oask.

22   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

23   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

24   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

25   “Elon Musk: The Future We’re Building—and Boring,” TED, May 3, 2017, YouTube video, 40:50,
     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zIwLWfaAg-8.

26   Tim Urban, “The Cook and the Chef: Musk’s Secret Sauce,” Wait But Why (blog), November 6,
     2015, https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/11/the-cook-and-the-chef-musks-secret-sauce.html.

27   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

28   “Third Row Tesla Podcast: Episode 7: Elon Musk’s Story: Director’s Cut,” Third Row Tesla,
     February 9, 2020, YouTube video, 3:35:03, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9oEc0wCQDE.

29   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

30   Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, “Joe Rogan Experience #1169: Elon Musk,” Powerful JRE, September
     6, 2018, YouTube video, 2:37:02, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ycPr5-27vSI.

31   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk Interviewed by Baidu CEO Robin Li,” Science, Technology
     & the Future, April 15, 2015, YouTube video, 55:49, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=6DBNKRYVY8g.

32   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

33   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

34   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

35   “Elon Musk’s 2003 Stanford University Entrepreneurial Thought Leaders Lecture,” Stanford
     eCorner, shazmosushi, July 12, 2013, YouTube video, 47:58, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=afZTrfvB2AQ.

36   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

37   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

38   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.




364 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
39   Walter Isaacson, Elon Musk (Simon & Schuster, 2023).

40   “2016 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla, May 31, 2016, https://www.tesla.
     com/2016shareholdermeeting.

41   “RAW Elon Musk Interview from Air Warfare Symposium 2020,” The Space Archive, March 2,
     2020, YouTube video, 59:01, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sp8smJFaKYE.

42   “Elon Musk, Air Warfare Symposium 2020.”

43   “Ron Baron Interviews Elon Musk at the 29th Annual Baron Investment Conference,”
     Baron Capital, January 4, 2023, YouTube video, 1:00:19, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=E-squeb0YJA.

44   Tim Dodd, “Go Up SpaceX’s Starship-Catching Robotic Launch Tower with Elon Musk!,”
     Everyday Astronaut, May 26, 2022,YouTube video, 32:58, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=XP5k3ZzPf_0.

45   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

46   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

47   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

48   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

49   Sriram Krishnan and Aarthi Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview,” The Good
     Time Show, Austin Byrd, January 31, 2021, YouTube video, 1:37:26, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=4_qxJEsvvSA.

50   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

51   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

52   Musk, “Interview with David Faber,” X Spaces.

53   “A Candid Interview with Tesla CEO Elon Musk,” Vator, August 11, 2010, YouTube video, 18:41,
     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B1h1aG0usIY.

54   “Elon Musk USC Commencement Speech | USC Marshall School of Business Undergraduate
     Commencement 2014,” USC, May 16, 2014, YouTube video, 6:16, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=e7Qh-vwpYH8.

55   “Candid Interview with Tesla CEO,” Vator.

56   Meghan Daum, “Elon Musk Wants to Change How (and Where) Humans
     Live,” Vogue, September 21, 2015, https://www.vogue.com/article/
     elon-musk-profile-entrepreneur-spacex-tesla-motors.

57   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

58   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

59   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

60   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

61   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

62   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

63   “Elon Musk Offers Advice to Young People,” Fox News, April 1, 2025, YouTube short video, 1:15,
     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3gSuepHv4Eg.




                                                                           S ources  · 3 65
64   “Elon Musk on How to Build the Future.”

65   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

66   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

67   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

68   “Elon Musk Reveals His Knowledge on Aliens, Challenges Putin to UFC, and Predicts WW3,”
     Full Send Podcast, August 4, 2022, YouTube video, 3:12:14, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=fXS_gkWAIs0.

69   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

70   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

71   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

72   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

73   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

74   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

75   Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, “Joe Rogan Experience #1470: Elon Musk,” Powerful JRE, May 7,
     2020, YouTube video, 2:00:08, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcYjXbSJBN8.

76   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

77   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

78   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

79   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

80   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

81   Elon Musk and Sam Altman, “Elon Musk and Y Combinator President on Thinking for the
     Future: FULL CONVERSATION,” Vanity Fair, October 8, 2015, YouTube video, 47:53, https://
     www.youtube.com/watch?v=SqEo107j-uw.

82   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

83   “Tesla CEO Elon Musk (2014),” Auto Bild, November 5, 2014, YouTube video, 34:01, https://
     youtu.be/FE4iFYqi4QU?t=897.

84   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

85   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

86   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

87   “Interview with Elon Musk: 29 September 2011,” The Motley Fool, November 23, 2021, YouTube
     video, 36:46, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bg06ojAR_lE.

88   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions! | SXSW 2018,” SXSW, March 11, 2018, YouTube video,
     1:11:37, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzlUyrccbos.

89   “Candid Interview with Tesla CEO,” Vator.

90   “Dinner Program: To Infinity and Beyond: Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk
     (Updated),” Milken Institute, July 12, 2013, YouTube video, 50:39, https://www.youtube.com/
     watch?v=T55CcN5c5as.




366 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
91    Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

92    “Clean Tech Summit 2011: IPO Spotlight with Elon Musk,” IBF: International Business Forum,
      February 3, 2011, YouTube video, 44:34, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTBZGWEzR_E.

93    Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

94    “The Mind Behind Tesla, SpaceX, SolarCity … | Elon Musk,” TED, March 19, 2013, YouTube
      video, 21:04, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgKWPdJWuBQ.

95    Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

96    “Elon Musk and Kevin Rose.”

97    “The Mind Behind Tesla, SpaceX, SolarCity.”

98    Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

99    “The Mind Behind Tesla, SpaceX, SolarCity.”

100   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

101   “Musk USC Commencement Speech.”

102   “Elon Musk and Kevin Rose.”

103   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

104   “Elon Musk: The Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School, November 22, 2012,
      YouTube video, 1:26:18, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c1HZIQliuoA.

105   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

106   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

107   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

108   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

109   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

110   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

111   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

112   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

113   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

114   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

115   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

116   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

117   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

118   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

119   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

120   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

121   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”




                                                                          S ources  · 3 67
122   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

123   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

124   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

125   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

126   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

127   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

128   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

129   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

130   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

131   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

132   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

133   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

134   Eric Berger, Liftoff: Elon Musk and the Desperate Early Days That Launched SpaceX (William
      Morrow, 2021).

135   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

136   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

137   Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, “#1609: Elon Musk,” February 11, 2021, in The Joe Rogan Experience,
      podcast, 3:24:00, https://open.spotify.com/episode/2aB2swgyXqbFA06AxPlFmr.

138   Elon Musk, “I Am Elon Musk, CEO/CTO of a Rocket Company, AMA!,”
      Reddit, r/IAmA, January 5, 2015, https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/
      comments/2rgsan/i_am_elon_musk_ceocto_of_a_rocket_company_ama/.

139   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

140   “Candid Interview with Tesla CEO,” Vator.

141   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

142   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

143   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

144   Musk, Reddit AMA.

145   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat with Elon Musk,” PandoMonthly, The Musk World, originally
      from July 17, 2012, uploaded October 27, 2023, YouTube video, 1:03:10, https://www.youtube.
      com/watch?v=1zzMe-b9ch4.

146   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

147   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

148   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

149   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

150   “2012: SpaceX: Elon Musk's Race to Space,” CBS News, 60 Minutes, December 9, 2018, YouTube
      video, 14:35, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=23GzpbNUyI4.




368 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
151   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

152   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

153   Hannah Elliott, “At Home with Elon Musk: The (Soon-to-Be) Bachelor Billionaire,”
      Forbes, March 26, 2012, https://www.forbes.com/sites/hannahelliott/2012/03/26/
      at-home-with-elon-musk-the-soon-to-be-bachelor-billionaire/?sh=6926dd2f729b.

154   John Battelle and Elon Musk, “Conversation with Elon Musk (Tesla Motors): Web 2.0
      Summit 08,” O'Reilly, November 10, 2008, YouTube video, 29:35, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=gVwmNaPsxLc.

155   Berger, Liftoff.

156   Chris Anderson, “Elon Musk’s Mission to Mars,” Wired, October 21, 2012, https://www.wired.
      com/2012/10/ff-elon-musk-qa/.

157   Anderson, “Elon Musk's Mission to Mars.”

158   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

159   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

160   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk,” Computer History Museum, recorded
      January 22, 2013, uploaded February 5, 2013, YouTube video, 1:16:51, https://www.youtube.
      com/watch?v=AHHwXUm3iIg.

161   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

162   Elon Musk, “Elon Musk Commencement Speech at Caltech / CIT 2012,” YouTube video,
      15:48, posted by “Elon Musk Best Videos,” November 22, 2015, https://youtube.com/
      watch?v=u688eJkLBRM.

163   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

164   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

165   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

166   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

167   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

168   Dan Carlin and Elon Musk, “EP17 Engineering Victory with Elon,” Dan Carlin’s Hardcore
      History: Addendum, Dan Carlin, December 13, 2021, YouTube video, 1:41:46, https://www.
      youtube.com/watch?v=T_Fa50Zc_3Y.

169   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

170   Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

171   Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

172   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

173   Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

174   Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

175   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

176   Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

177   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”




                                                                           S ources  · 3 69
178   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

179   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

180   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

181   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

182   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

183   “Elon Musk on Advertisers, Trust and the ‘Wild Storm’ in His Mind | DealBook Summit 2023,”
      New York Times Events, November 30, 2023, YouTube video, 1:33:36, https://www.youtube.
      com/watch?v=2BfMuHDfGJI.

184   “2023 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla, May 16, 2023, https://www.tesla.
      com/2023shareholdermeeting.

185   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

186   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

187   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

188   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

189   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

190   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

191   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

192   Sal Kahn and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX,” Khan Academy, April
      22, 2013, YouTube video, 48:41, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vDwzmJpI4io.

193   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

194   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

195   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

196   Jimmy Soni, The Founders: The Story of PayPal and the Entrepreneurs Who Shaped Silicon
      Valley (Simon & Schuster, 2022).

197   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

198   Soni, The Founders.

199   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

200   Berger, Liftoff.

201   Carl Hoffman, “Elon Musk, the Rocket Man with a Sweet Ride,” Smithsonian
      Magazine, December 2012, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/
      elon-musk-the-rocket-man-with-a-sweet-ride-136059680/.

202   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

203   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

204   Elon Musk, “Elon Musk Commencement Speech at Caltech / CIT 2012,” YouTube video,
      15:48, posted by “Elon Musk Best Videos,” November 22, 2015, https://youtube.com/
      watch?v=u688eJkLBRM.

205   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”




370 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
206   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

207   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

208   “Elon Musk on Tesla, SpaceX and Why He Left Silicon Valley | WSJ,” The Wall Street Journal,
      December 9, 2020, YouTube video, 26:47, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V1nQFotzQMQ.

209   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

210   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

211   Noah Magel, ed., Musk’s Memos: The Leaked Emails That Built an Empire (noah@koda-labs.com,
      2024).

212   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

213   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

214   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

215   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

216   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

217   Musk, Reddit AMA.

218   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

219   “Candid Interview with Tesla CEO,” Vator.

220   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

221   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1169.”

222   “10 Questions for Elon Musk,” TIME, July 19, 2010, https://content.time.com/time/magazine/
      article/0,9171,2002512,00.html.

223   Daum, “Elon Musk Wants to Change How Humans Live.”

224   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

225   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

226   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

227   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

228   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

229   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

230   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

231   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

232   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

233   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

234   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

235   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

236   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”




                                                                           S ources  · 3 7 1
237   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

238   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

239   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

240   Tim Urban, “How (and Why) SpaceX Will Colonize Mars: Part 2,” Wait But Why (blog), August
      16, 2015, https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/08/how-and-why-spacex-will-colonize-mars.html/2.

241   Urban, “SpaceX Will Colonize Mars, Part 2.”

242   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

243   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1169.”

244   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

245   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

246   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

247   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

248   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

249   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

250   “Elon Musk Talks About His Firing as PayPal CEO 2008,” Inc. 5000 Conference, Elon
      Musk Best Videos, December 4, 2015, YouTube video, 24:50, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=9e4AaXzagfc.

251   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

252   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

253   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

254   Tim Dodd, “Starbase Tour with Elon Musk [PART 1 // Summer 2021],” Everyday Astronaut,
      August 3, 2021, YouTube video, 53:16, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t705r8ICkRw.

255   “Tesla CEO Elon Musk,” Auto Bild.

256   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

257   Jennifer Reingold, “Hondas in Space,” Fast Company, February 1, 2005, https://www.
      fastcompany.com/52065/hondas-space.

258   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

259   “Musk USC Commencement Speech.”

260   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

261   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

262   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

263   “Elon Musk: 2020 Mars Society Virtual Convention,” The Mars Society, October 16, 2020,
      YouTube video, 56:48, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5Aw6WG4Dww.

264   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

265   Berger, Liftoff.

266   Berger, Liftoff.




372 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
267   “Tesla CEO Elon Musk,” Auto Bild.

268   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

269   “2023 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

270   Battelle and Musk, “Web 2.0 Summit 08.”

271   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

272   “2023 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

273   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

274   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

275   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”

276   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

277   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

278   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

279   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

280   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

281   “Elon Musk on Advertisers,” DealBook Summit 2023.

282   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

283   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

284   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

285   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

286   “Tesla Factory Tour with Elon Musk!,” Marques Brownlee, August 20, 2018, YouTube video,
      15:19, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mr9kK0_7x08.

287   “Tesla Factory Tour,” Marques Brownlee.

288   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

289   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

290   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

291   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

292   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

293   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

294   “Elon Musk, Air Warfare Symposium 2020.”

295   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

296   Tim Dodd, “Talking to Elon Musk and Jim Bridenstine About SpaceX Fly Astronauts for the 1st
      Time! #DM2,” Everyday Astronaut, May 27, 2020, YouTube video, 21:48, https://www.youtube.
      com/watch?v=p4ZLysa9Qqg.

297   “Elon Musk, Air Warfare Symposium 2020.”




                                                                          S ources  · 3 7 3
298   “Interview with Elon Musk,” Motley Fool, 2011.

299   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

300   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

301   “Bill Gates and Elon Musk,” Baidu.

302   “Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla at ONS 2014,” ONS: Energy Meeting Place, November 13, 2014,
      YouTube video, 26:52, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ZsVxSDB7NY&t=2s.

303   Berger, Liftoff.

304   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

305   Tim Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX’s Starfactory w/ Elon Musk,” Everyday Astronaut, June 22,
      2024, YouTube video, 1:04:17, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aFqjoCbZ4ik.

306   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

307   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

308   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

309   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

310   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

311   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

312   “Elon Musk Interview: 1-on-1 with Sandy Munro,” Munro Live, February 2, 2021, YouTube video,
      48:58, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YAtLTLiqNwg.

313   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

314   Brad Lemley, “Shooting the Moon,” Discover Magazine, September 8, 2005, https://www.
      discovermagazine.com/the-sciences/shooting-the-moon.

315   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

316   “Tesla Factory Tour,” Marques Brownlee.

317   “Tesla Factory Tour,” Marques Brownlee.

318   “Tesla Factory Tour,” Marques Brownlee.

319   “Elon Musk Interview,” Munro Live.

320   “Elon Musk Interview,” Munro Live.

321   “Elon Musk Interview,” Munro Live.

322   “Elon Musk Interview,” Munro Live.

323   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

324   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”

325   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”

326   Tim Dodd, “Starbase Tour with Elon Musk [PART 2 // Summer 2021],” Everyday Astronaut,
      August 7, 2021, YouTube video, 1:01:18, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SA8ZBJWo73E.

327   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”




374 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
328   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

329   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

330   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

331   Musk, “Interview with David Faber,” X Spaces.

332   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

333   “Elon Musk, Air Warfare Symposium 2020.”

334   Magel, ed., Musk's Memos.

335   Elon Musk, “Tesla Battery Day,” Tesla, September 22, 2020, YouTube video, 2:11:29, https://
      www.youtube.com/watch?v=l6T9xIeZTds.

336   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

337   Ashlee Vance, Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future (Ecco, 2015).

338   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

339   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

340   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

341   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

342   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

343   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

344   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

345   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

346   xAI, “Colossus: Our Gigafactory of Compute,” accessed November 14, 2025, https://x.ai/
      colossus.

347   “Elon Musk Answers All Your Questions (Investor Day 2023),” CNET Highlights, March 1, 2023,
      YouTube video, 41:03, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZFzhO6fZ9vQ.

348   Berger, Liftoff.

349   Chris Anderson and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: A Future Worth Getting Excited About,” TED,
      April 17, 2022, YouTube video, 1:06:24, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YRvf00NooN8.

350   “Elon Musk | Full interview | Code Conference 2016,” On with Kara Swisher, June 2, 2016,
      YouTube video, 1:24:14, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wsixsRI-Sz4.

351   “Tesla Motors (TSLA) Elon Reeve Musk on Q1 2016 Results: Earnings Call Transcript,” Seeking
      Alpha, May 4, 2016, https://seekingalpha.com/article/3971543-tesla-motors-tsla-elon-reeve-
      musk-on-q1-2016-results-earnings-call-transcript.

352   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

353   “Elon Musk Podcast Feb 2019 Full,” ARK Invest, Thayqua, February 21, 2019, YouTube video,
      29:13, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOy3MTZ9Dyg.

354   “Elon Musk Podcast,” ARK Invest.

355   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”




                                                                              S ources  · 3 7 5
356   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

357   Battelle and Musk, “Web 2.0 Summit 08.”

358   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

359   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

360   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

361   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

362   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

363   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

364   “Elon Musk on How to Build the Future.”

365   Elon Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux,” Tesla Blog, July 20, 2016, https://www.tesla.com/
      master-plan-part-deux.

366   “Tesla Q1 2016 Earnings Call.”

367   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

368   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

369   “Elon Musk, Air Warfare Symposium 2020.”

370   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

371   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”

372   Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, “#2054: Elon Musk,” October 31, 2023, in The Joe Rogan Experience,
      podcast, 2:41:00, https://open.spotify.com/episode/7edwvm2c6Ieuzun4xtFYCJ.

373   “Elon Musk,” Code Conference 2016.

374   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”

375   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

376   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”

377   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #2054.”

378   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

379   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

380   “Elon Musk Interview,” Munro Live.

381   Rainn Wilson and Elon Musk, “Tesla’s Elon Musk Meets Rainn Wilson in the Metaphysical
      Van Long Before the Cybertruck Was a Thing,” SoulPancake, October 8, 2021, YouTube video,
      25:11,https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMkwsSAIAfY.

382   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

383   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

384   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

385   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

386   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”




376 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
387   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

388   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

389   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

390   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

391   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

392   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

393   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

394   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

395   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

396   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

397   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

398   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

399   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

400   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

401   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

402   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

403   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”

404   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

405   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

406   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

407   Elon Musk and Maurice J. Fitzgerald, Interactive Network Directory Service with Integrated
      Maps and Directions, US Patent 5,944,769, filed November 8, 1996, and issued August 31, 1999,
      https://patents.justia.com/patent/5944769#claims.

408   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

409   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

410   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

411   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

412   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

413   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

414   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

415   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

416   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

417   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

418   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.




                                                                            S ources  · 3 7 7
419   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

420   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

421   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

422   Soni, The Founders.

423   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

424   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

425   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

426   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

427   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

428   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

429   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

430   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

431   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

432   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

433   Soni, The Founders.

434   Soni, The Founders.

435   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

436   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

437   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

438   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

439   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

440   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

441   “The Mind Behind Tesla, SpaceX, SolarCity.”

442   Soni, The Founders.

443   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

444   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

445   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

446   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

447   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

448   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

449   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

450   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

451   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”




378 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
452   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

453   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

454   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

455   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

456   “Elon Musk on His PayPal Firing,” Inc. 5000.

457   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

458   “Elon Musk on His PayPal Firing,” Inc. 5000.

459   Max Chafkin, “Entrepreneur of the Year, 2007: Elon Musk,” Inc., December 1, 2007, https://
      www.inc.com/magazine/20071201/entrepreneur-of-the-year-elon-musk.html.

460   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

461   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

462   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

463   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

464   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

465   “Conversation avec Elon Musk à Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne,” Université Paris 1 Panthéon-
      Sorbonne, December 3, 2015, YouTube video, 1:03:45, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=BMskI6G9ty0.

466   Elon Musk, “The Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan (Just Between You and Me),” Tesla Blog,
      August 2, 2006, https://www.tesla.com/secret-master-plan.

467   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

468   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

469   “Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla at ONS 2014.”

470   “Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla at ONS 2014.”

471   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

472   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

473   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

474   Hoffman, “Elon Musk, the Rocket Man.”

475   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

476   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

477   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

478   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

479   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

480   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

481   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

482   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”




                                                                            S ources  · 3 7 9
483   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

484   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

485   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

486   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

487   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

488   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

489   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

490   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

491   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

492   “Elon Musk Interview with Billionaire Investment Legend Ron Baron 2015,” Baron Capital,
      Elon Musk Best Videos, December 4, 2015, YouTube video, 51:05, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=qsIbGKosY1E.

493   “2016 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

494   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

495   Musk and Altman, “Thinking for the Future.”

496   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

497   Musk and Altman, “Thinking for the Future.”

498   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

499   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

500   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

501   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

502   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

503   “Elon Musk on His PayPal Firing,” Inc. 5000.

504   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

505   “Talking Tech with Elon Musk!,” Marques Brownlee, August 17, 2018, YouTube video, 17:53,
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MevKTPN4ozw.

506   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

507   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

508   Musk, “Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan.”

509   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

510   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

511   “Young Elon Musk Documentary (1999).”

512   “Young Elon Musk Documentary (1999).”

513   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”




380 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
514   “Young Elon Musk Documentary (1999).”

515   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

516   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

517   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

518   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

519   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

520   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

521   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

522   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

523   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

524   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

525   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

526   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

527   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

528   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

529   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

530   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

531   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

532   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

533   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

534   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

535   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

536   Elon Musk, “Elon Musk Writes Letter to the People of New Jersey,” CleanTechnica, 2013,
      https://cleantechnica.com/2014/03/15/elon-musk-writes-letter-people-new-jersey/.

537   “Creating the World’s Best Service and Warranty Program,” Tesla (blog), April 26, 2013.

538   “2016 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

539   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

540   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

541   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

542   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

543   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

544   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

545   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

546   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”




                                                                              S ources  · 3 81
547   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

548   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

549   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

550   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

551   “Elon Musk Delivers SpaceX Update on Starship, Mars Goals and More at Starbase,”
      VideoFromSpace, YouTube video, May 29, 2025, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=0nMfW7T3rx4.

552   “Talking Tech with Elon Musk,” Marques Brownlee.

553   Battelle and Musk, “Web 2.0 Summit 08.”

554   “Talking Tech with Elon Musk,” Marques Brownlee.

555   Dodd, “Starship-Catching Tower.”

556   Musk, “Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan.”

557   Musk, “Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan.”

558   “Musk USC Commencement Speech.”

559   “Elon Musk Interview,” Munro Live.

560   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

561   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

562   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

563   “2016 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

564   “Talking Tech with Elon Musk,” Marques Brownlee.

565   “Talking Tech with Elon Musk,” Marques Brownlee.

566   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

567   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

568   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

569   Lex Fridman and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: Tesla Autopilot | Lex Fridman Podcast
      #18,” Lex Fridman, April 12, 2019, YouTube video, 32:44, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=dEv99vxKjVI.

570   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

571   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

572   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

573   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

574   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

575   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

576   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

577   Isaacson, Elon Musk.




382 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
578   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

579   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

580   Return to Space, directed by Jimmy Chin and Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi, Netflix (2022).

581   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

582   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

583   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

584   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

585   “‘Why Does Space Inspire Us?’ Elon Musk,” SpaceX, December 5, 2011, YouTube video, 1:07,
      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_yDZY5_u8FQ.

586   “Why Does Space Inspire Us?”

587   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

588   Urban, “The Cook and the Chef.”

589   “Elon Musk and the Frontier of Technology,” transcript, Think Tank with Ben Wattenberg, PBS,
      December 13, 2007, https://www.pbs.org/thinktank/transcript1292.html.

590   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

591   “Elon Musk ‘Mars Pioneer Award’ Acceptance Speech: 15th Annual International Mars Society
      Convention,” The Mars Society, August 9, 2012, YouTube video, 33:00, https://www.youtube.
      com/watch?v=PK0kTcJFnVk.

592   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

593   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

594   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1169.”

595   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

596   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

597   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

598   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

599   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

600   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

601   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

602   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

603   “Musk Mars Pioneer Award Speech.”

604   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

605   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

606   “2016 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

607   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

608   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”




                                                                            S ources  · 3 83
609   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

610   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

611   “Musk, Stanford GSB 2013.”

612   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

613   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

614   Berger, Liftoff.

615   Anderson, “Elon Musk's Mission to Mars.”

616   Anderson, “Elon Musk's Mission to Mars.”

617   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

618   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

619   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

620   “Musk's 2003 Stanford Lecture.”

621   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

622   “Elon Musk, Charlie Rose Interview (2009).”

623   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

624   Berger, Liftoff.

625   Berger, Liftoff.

626   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

627   Berger, Liftoff.

628   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

629   Berger, Liftoff.

630   Kimbal, “The Plan Going Forward,” Kwajalein Atoll and Rockets (blog), August 3, 2008, http://
      kwajrockets.blogspot.com/2008/08/plan-going-forward.html.

631   “ISSRDC 2015: A Conversation with Elon Musk,” ISS National Lab, July 8, 2015, YouTube video,
      53:03, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZmEg95wPiVU.

632   “SpaceX: Elon Musk's Race to Space,” 60 Minutes.

633   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

634   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

635   “Pando Monthly Fireside Chat.”

636   Berger, Liftoff.

637   Berger, Liftoff.

638   Berger, Liftoff.

639   Berger, Liftoff.

640   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.




384 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
641   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

642   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

643   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

644   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

645   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

646   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

647   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 1.”

648   Tim Dodd, “Starbase Tour with Elon Musk [PART 3 // Summer 2021],” Everyday Astronaut,
      August 11, 2021, YouTube video, 20:51, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Zlnbs-NBUI.

649   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

650   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 2.”

651   “Elon Musk Delivers SpaceX Update Following Starship Flight 3! Talk Mars, Moon and
      More,” VideoFromSpace, April 8, 2024, YouTube video, 39:48, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=7DPR9rzVCzk.

652   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

653   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

654   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

655   Berger, Liftoff.

656   “Elon Musk,” Code Conference 2016.

657   “Musk Mars Pioneer Award Speech.”

658   “Elon Musk,” Code Conference 2016.

659   “Musk Mars Pioneer Award Speech.”

660   Tom Junod, “Elon Musk: Triumph of His Will,” Esquire, November 14, 2012, https://www.
      esquire.com/news-politics/a16681/elon-musk-interview-1212/.

661   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

662   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

663   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

664   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

665   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

666   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

667   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

668   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

669   “Elon Musk’s NEW EPIC Rant!,” Matt Pocius on Tesla Stock & Money, June 16, 2024, YouTube
      video, 42:43, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dRZUt6tu8bw.

670   “Elon Musk,” Code Conference 2016.




                                                                         S ources  · 3 85
671   Peter H. Diamandis and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk on AGI Safety, Superintelligence, and
      Neuralink (2024) | EP #91,” Peter H. Diamandis, March 25, 2024, YouTube video, 30:27, https://
      www.youtube.com/watch?v=akXMYvKjUxM.

672   Diamandis and Musk, “AGI Safety, Superintelligence, and Neuralink.”

673   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

674   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

675   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

676   “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

677   Dodd, “First Look Inside SpaceX's Starfactory.”

678   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

679   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 3.”

680   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 3.”

681   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 3.”

682   “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

683   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

684   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

685   Dodd, “Starship-Catching Tower.”

686   “Musk Mars Pioneer Award Speech.”

687   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

688   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

689   “Musk Mars Pioneer Award Speech.”

690   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

691   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

692   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

693   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”

694   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”

695   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

696   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

697   “Elon Musk on Advertisers,” DealBook Summit 2023.

698   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

699   Musk, “Interview with David Faber,” X Spaces.

700   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

701   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

702   “TIME Person of the Year: Elon Musk.”




386 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
703   “TIME Person of the Year: Elon Musk.”

704   Dodd, “Starship-Catching Tower.”

705   Wilson and Musk, “Metaphysical Van.”

706   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

707   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

708   “TIME Person of the Year: Elon Musk.”

709   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

710   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

711   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

712   Musk, “Interview with David Faber,” X Spaces.

713   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

714   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

715   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

716   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

717   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

718   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

719   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

720   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

721   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

722   “Future of Energy & Transport,” Oxford Martin School.

723   “Elon Musk on Tesla, SpaceX,” WSJ.

724   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

725   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

726   “Musk USC Commencement Speech.”

727   “Musk USC Commencement Speech.”

728   “Elon Musk, Air Warfare Symposium 2020.”

729   Dodd, “Starbase Tour, Part 3.”

730   “Elon Musk on How to Build the Future.”

731   “Elon Musk on How to Build the Future.”

732   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

733   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

734   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

735   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.




                                                                   S ources  · 3 87
736   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

737   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

738   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

739   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

740   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

741   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

742   Ryan Knutson, “Elon Musk on 2024 Politics, Succession Plans and Whether AI Will
      Annihilate Humanity,” The Journal, podcast, May 24, 2023, 18:55, https://open.spotify.com/
      episode/7HyKBExI7aM0KAGZ6WzmgD?context=spotify:show:0KxdEdeY2Wb3zr28dMlQva&nd=1.

743   “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

744   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

745   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

746   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

747   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1169.”

748   Knutson, “Elon Musk on 2024 Politics.”

749   Berger, Liftoff.

750   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

751   “Elon Musk (Full Interview) | Real Time with Bill Maher (HBO),” Real Time with Bill Maher,
      April 29, 2023, YouTube video, 21:20, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oO8w6XcXJUs.

752   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

753   “Elon Musk,” Real Time with Bill Maher.

754   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

755   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

756   Tim Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain’s Magical Future,” Wait But Why (blog), April 20, 2017,
      https://waitbutwhy.com/2017/04/neuralink.html.

757   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

758   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

759   “Elon Musk on How to Build the Future.”

760   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

761   “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

762   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

763   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

764   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

765   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

766   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”




388 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
767   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

768   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

769   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

770   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #18.”

771   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

772   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #18.”

773   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #18.”

774   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

775   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

776   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

777   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

778   “2016 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

779   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

780   “Elon Musk Podcast,” ARK Invest.

781   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

782   “The Future We're Building—and Boring.”

783   Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

784   “Elon Musk, Investor Day 2023.”

785   Musk, “Master Plan, Part Deux.”

786   “2023 Annual Shareholder Meeting,” Tesla.

787   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

788   The Tesla Team, Master Plan Part IV (Tesla, September 1, 2025), https://digitalassets.tesla.com/
      tesla-contents/image/upload/Tesla-Master-Plan-Part-4.pdf.

789   “Elon Musk’s Tesla Master Plan 3 in 22 Mins (SUPERCUT),” Farzad, March 2, 2023, YouTube
      video, 22:48, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BoGNEZF2XFQ.

790   Tesla Contributors and Advisors, Master Plan Part 3: Sustainable Energy for All of Earth (Tesla,
      April 5, 2023), https://www.tesla.com/ns_videos/Tesla-Master-Plan-Part-3.pdf.

791   Anderson and Musk, “A Future Worth Getting Excited About.”

792   “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

793   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

794   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

795   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

796   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

797   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”




                                                                              S ources  · 3 89
798   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

799   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

800   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

801   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

802   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

803   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

804   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

805   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

806   Lex Fridman and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: War, AI, Aliens, Politics, Physics, Video Games, and
      Humanity | Lex Fridman Podcast #400,” Lex Fridman, November 9, 2023, YouTube video,
      2:16:46, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JN3KPFbWCy8.

807   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #400.”

808   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #400.”

809   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #400.”

810   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

811   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

812   “Elon Musk on Tesla, SpaceX,” WSJ.

813   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

814   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

815   “Elon Musk on Advertisers,” DealBook Summit 2023.

816   “Elon Musk on Advertisers,” DealBook Summit 2023.

817   “Elon Musk on Advertisers,” DealBook Summit 2023.

818   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

819   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

820   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

821   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

822   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

823   “Elon Musk on Tesla, SpaceX,” WSJ.

824   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

825   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

826   “CHM Revolutionaries: An Evening with Elon Musk.”

827   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”

828   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

829   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.




390 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
830   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

831   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

832   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

833   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

834   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

835   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

836   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

837   Diamandis and Musk, “AGI Safety, Superintelligence, and Neuralink.”

838   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

839   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #400.”

840   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

841   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #2054.”

842   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

843   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

844   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

845   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1470.”

846   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

847   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

848   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

849   Diamandis and Musk, “AGI Safety, Superintelligence, and Neuralink.”

850   Diamandis and Musk, “AGI Safety, Superintelligence, and Neuralink.”

851   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

852   Diamandis and Musk, “AGI Safety, Superintelligence, and Neuralink.”

853   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

854   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

855   “Elon Musk on Advertisers,” DealBook Summit 2023.

856   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1169.”

857   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1169.”

858   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

859   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

860   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

861   Urban, “Neuralink and the Brain's Magical Future.”

862   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.




                                                                            S ources  · 3 91
863   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

864   “Elon Musk on How to Save the Human Race at #2024 Milken Conference,” Electron
      media group, inc., May 7, 2024, YouTube video, 40:34, https://www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=s5o5m7LP6YY.

865   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

866   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

867   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

868   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

869   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

870   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

871   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

872   “Elon Musk on How to Save the Human Race,” Milken Conference.

873   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

874   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

875   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

876   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

877   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

878   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

879   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

880   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

881   “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

882   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

883   Isaacson, Elon Musk.

884   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

885   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

886   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

887   “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

888   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

889   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

890   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

891   “Elon Musk on How to Save the Human Race,” Milken Conference.

892   Peterson and Musk, “Dr. Peterson x Elon Musk.”

893   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

894   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.




392 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
895   Dodd, “Starship-Catching Tower.”

896   Dodd, “Starship-Catching Tower.”

897   Dodd, “Starship-Catching Tower.”

898   Return to Space.

899   “Elon Musk on His PayPal Firing,” Inc. 5000.

900   Robert Strauss, “The Next, Next Thing,” The Pennsylvania Gazette, November 1, 2008, https://
      thepenngazette.com/the-next-next-thing/.

901   “Elon Musk on His PayPal Firing,” Inc. 5000.

902   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

903   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

904   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

905   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

906   Lex Fridman and Elon Musk, “Elon Musk: Neuralink, AI, Autopilot, and the Pale Blue Dot | Lex
      Fridman Podcast #49,” Lex Fridman, November 12, 2019, YouTube video, 36:09, https://www.
      youtube.com/watch?v=smK9dgdTl40.

907   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

908   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

909   Wilson and Musk, “Metaphysical Van.”

910   Wilson and Musk, “Metaphysical Van.”

911   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

912   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

913   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

914   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

915   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

916   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

917   Return to Space.

918   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

919   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

920   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

921   “Elon Musk on How to Save the Human Race,” Milken Conference.

922   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

923   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

924   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

925   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”




                                                                            S ources  · 3 93
926   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

927   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

928   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

929   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

930   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

931   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

932   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

933   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

934   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

935   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

936   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

937   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

938   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

939   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

940   “Elon Musk: 10X Every 6 Months.”

941   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

942   Musk and Altman, “Thinking for the Future.”

943   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

944   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

945   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

946   Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

947   Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

948   Khan and Musk, “CEO of Tesla Motors and SpaceX.”

949   Urban, “SpaceX Will Colonize Mars, Part 2.”

950   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

951   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

952   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

953   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update at Starbase,” May 2025.

954   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

955   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

956   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

957   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

958   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”




394 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
959   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

960   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

961   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

962   “Elon Musk SpaceX Update, Starship Flight 3.”

963   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

964   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

965   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

966   “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

967   “Elon Musk,” Full Send Podcast.

968   Musk and Altman, “Thinking for the Future.”

969   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

970   Tim Urban, “SpaceX’s Big F***ing Rocket: The Full Story,” Wait But Why (blog), September 29,
      2016, https://waitbutwhy.com/2016/09/spacexs-big-fking-rocket-the-full-story.html.

971   “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

972   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

973   “Elon Musk's Vision for the Future.”

974   Urban, “SpaceX's Big F***ing Rocket.”

975   Return to Space.

976   Urban, “SpaceX's Big F***ing Rocket.”

977   “Elon Musk at TED2022.”

978   “Elon Musk: Digital Superintelligence,” Y Combinator.

979   Urban, “SpaceX Will Colonize Mars, Part 2.”

980   Urban, “SpaceX Will Colonize Mars, Part 2.”

981   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

982   Musk, “Caltech Commencement Speech.”

983   The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica, “Elon Musk,” Britannica Money, Encyclopaedia
      Britannica, accessed November 13, 2025, https://www.britannica.com/biography/Elon-Musk.

984   Vance, Elon Musk.

985   Ashlee Vance, “Elon Musk: The College Years,” Esquire, June 5, 2015, https://www.esquire.com/
      entertainment/books/a35508/elon-musk-college-years-canada-u-penn/.

986   Vance, “Elon Musk: The College Years.”

987   Vance, “Elon Musk: The College Years.”

988   Rogan and Musk, “JRE #1609.”

989   “Jeff Skoll Talks with Elon and Kimbal Musk.”




                                                                           S ources  · 3 95
990   Mahnoor Khan, “Why Elon Musk Dropped Out of Stanford After Only Two Days,” Fortune,
      February 15, 2022, https://fortune.com/2022/02/15/why-elon-musk-dropped-out-of-stanford/.

991   Vance, Elon Musk.

992   Vance, Elon Musk; Sara-Jayne Slack, “Elon Musk Facts: History, Achievements and Net Worth,”
      Academy Center, Investing.com, last modified August 21, 2024, https://www.investing.com/
      academy/statistics/elon-musk-facts/.

993   Tom Huddleston Jr., “Elon Musk Slept on His Office Couch and ‘Showered at the YMCA’ While
      Starting His First Company,” CNBC, June 19, 2018, https://www.cnbc.com/2018/06/19/how-
      elon-musk-founded-zip2-with-his-brother-kimbal.html.

994   “Third Row Tesla Podcast, Episode 7.”

995   US Securities and Exchange Commission, “Form 10-K: PayPal, Inc.,” archived August 25,
      2020, https://web.archive.org/web/20200825231531/https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
      data/1103415/000091205702009834/a2073071z10-k405.htm.

996   Ashlee Vance, “Elon Musk’s Space Dream Almost Killed Tesla,” Bloomberg, May 14, 2015,
      https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-elon-musk-spacex/.

997   Vance, Elon Musk.

998   Matt Burns, “A Brief History of Tesla,” TechCrunch, October 8, 2014, https://web.archive.org/
      web/20150717064829/https://techcrunch.com/gallery/a-brief-history-of-tesla/#/slide3.

999   “Series C: Tesla,” Crunchbase, accessed November 13, 2025, https://www.crunchbase.com/
      funding_round/tesla-motors-series-c--ced5cae2.

1000 Berger, Liftoff.

1001 Drake Baer, “The Making of Tesla: Invention, Betrayal, and the Birth of the Roadster,” Business
     Insider, October 31, 2014, https://www.businessinsider.com/tesla-the-origin-story-2014-10.

1002 John Boudreau, “Tesla Motors Begins Delivering Model S Electric Cars in a Silicon Valley
     Milestone,” The Mercury News, June 22, 2012, https://www.mercurynews.com/2012/06/22/
     tesla-motors-begins-delivering-model-s-electric-cars-in-a-silicon-valley-milestone-2/.

1003 Astra Nova School, accessed November 14, 2025, https://www.astranova.org/.

1004 Mike Wall, “Wow! SpaceX Lands Orbital Rocket Successfully in Historic First,” Space.com,
     December 21, 2015, https://www.space.com/31420-spacex-rocket-landing-success.html.

1005 Cade Metz, “Inside OpenAI, Elon Musk’s Wild Plan to Set Artificial Intelligence Free,” WIRED,
     April 27, 2016, https://www.wired.com/2016/04/openai-elon-musk-sam-altman-plan-to-set-
     artificial-intelligence-free/?utm_source=chatgpt.com.

1006 Sony Salzman et al., “Neuralink’s First Brain Implant Patient Feared Device Would
     Have to Be Removed,” ABC News, May 17, 2024, https://abcnews.go.com/GMA/Wellness/
     neuralinks-brain-implant-patient-feared-device-removed/story?id=110325322.

1007 Fred Lambert, “Tesla Model 3: Pictures of the Very First Production Unit at the Factory,”
     Electrek, July 9, 2017, https://electrek.co/2017/07/09/tesla-model-3-production-pictures/.

1008 Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #400.”

1009 Jackie Wattles, “NASA, SpaceX Launch Astronauts from US Soil for the First Time in a Decade,”
     CNN, May 30, 2020, https://edition.cnn.com/2020/05/30/tech/spacex-nasa-launch-astronauts-
     scn/index.html.




396 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
1010 Sergei Klebnikov, “Elon Musk Is Now the Richest Person in the World, Officially Surpassing
     Jeff Bezos,” Forbes, last modified January 8, 2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
     sergeiklebnikov/2021/01/08/elon-musk-is-now-the-richest-person-in-the-world-officially-
     surpassing-jeff-bezos/?sh=13de3e433b86.

1011   Tien Le and Vanessa Romo, “Elon Musk Is Time’s 2021 Person of the Year,” December 13, 2021,
       https://www.npr.org/2021/12/13/1063792887/elon-musk-time-person-of-the-year.

1012 Elon Musk (@elonmusk), “The first human received an implant from @Neuralink yesterday
     and is recovering well. Initial results show promising neuron spike detection,” X, January 29,
     2024, https://x.com/elonmusk/status/1752098683024220632.

1013 Mike Wendling, BBC News, “Elon Musk’s Starbase in Texas Will Officially Become a City,” BBC
     News, May 4, 2025, https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c39j8rj4nmmo.

1014 Matt Durot, “Elon Musk Just Became the First Person Ever Worth $500 Billion,” Forbes,
     last modified October 2, 2025, https://www.forbes.com/sites/mattdurot/2025/10/01/
     elon-musk-just-became-the-first-person-ever-worth-500-billion/.

1015 “Tesla AI Day 2022.”

1016 Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

1017 Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

1018 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1019 “Elon Musk Answers Your Questions,” SXSW 2018.

1020 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1021 Caitlin Shamberg, “Can Elon Musk Fix the 405?,” KCRW, March 19, 2013, https://www.kcrw.
     com/culture/articles/can-elon-musk-fix-the-405.

1022 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1023 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1024 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1025 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1026 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1027 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1028 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1029 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1030 “Will Smith Hosts Meme Review w/ Elon Musk [MEME REVIEW] #50,” PewDiePie, February 22,
     2019, YouTube video, 19:48, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zpWYQ1YtgnI&t=1024s.

1031 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1032 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1033 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1034 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1035 “Elon Musk Recommends 12 Books That Changed His Life,” Farnam Street Media, FS (blog),
     2021, https://fs.blog/elon-musk-book-recommendations/.




                                                                             S ources  · 3 97
1036 Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #438.”

1037 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1038 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1039 “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

1040 Krishnan and Ramamurthy, “Elon Musk Clubhouse Interview.”

1041 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1042 “Birthrate Threat,” WELT Documentary.

1043 Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

1044 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1045 Carlin and Musk, “Engineering Victory.”

1046 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1047 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1048 Richard Garriott and David Fisher, Explore/Create: My Life in Pursuit of New Frontiers, Hidden
     Worlds, and the Creative Spark (William Morrow, 2017).

1049 “Elon Musk and Kevin Rose,” Kevin Rose, September 7, 2012, YouTube video, 26:42, https://
     www.youtube.com/watch?v=L-s_3b5fRd8.

1050 Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #252.”

1051 Fridman and Musk, “Lex Fridman Podcast #400.”

1052 Max Tegmark, Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence (Vintage Books, 2017).

1053 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1054 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1055 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1056 Ian Goodfellow et al., Deep Learning (MIT Press, 2016).

1057 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1058 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1059 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1060 Peter Thiel and Blake Masters, Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future
     (Crown Business, 2014).

1061 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.

1062 “Elon Musk's NEW EPIC Rant.”

1063 Musk (@elonmusk), X account.




398 · T H E B O O K O F E L O N
